

In a village named Manguli, lived Alidu's family.

Alidu and his wife, Mary, had two children, named Alima and Abu.

Alima was six years old, and her brother Abu was nine.

One day, Alima told her father about the animals she had learned about in school. "Dada, our teacher told us there is a place where we can see animals."

Father replied, "Yes, there is a zoo in Kumasi, a place where animals are kept for people to visit and see." 

Alima was happy to hear that and said, "I want to go there."

Abu added, "Yes, Dada, take us to the Zoo."

Their father agreed. He drove the whole family to the zoo in Kumasi.

When they arrived at the zoo, Alidu paid the tour guide to take his family around.

He also bought Alima and Abu ice cream.

During the tour, Alima and Abu saw elephants, lions and many other animals they had learned about in school.

They were very happy to see the animals.

After touring the zoo, they got back in their car and returned home with excitement and beautiful memories. 

Alima said, "Dada, I would love to come back again one day to visit."

------------------------------------------------------------



Fana and her family live in Debre Birhan, a busy town in Ethiopia. 

Fana is a Grade 3 student. She is good-hearted and wise.

Fana loves animals. She has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove. 

She spends time with these animals, feeding them, and playing with them.

One day, Fana was playing in the school yard with her friends when she saw children throwing stones at doves. 

"Why are they hurting the doves?" she asked herself.

She stopped playing and ran towards the children who were throwing stones. 

At first her friends didn't understand what was happening, then they followed her. 

"Stop throwing stones," shouted Fana.

The other children ran away. 

Fana caught the two injured doves. She saw wounds on their wings. She decided to take the doves home to look after them.

She fed the doves. In the evening she told her family about how she saved the doves.

In the morning Fana and her parents went to the clinic and got medicine for the doves. 

After a few days, the doves' wounds healed. Fana felt very happy.

Fana always tells her friends, "I love animals. Animals are our friends. They help us. We must protect and preserve them. "

------------------------------------------------------------



Chicken and Millipede were friends.

They went to play football.

Chicken was the goal keeper.

Millipede scored three goals!

Chicken was annoyed.

Chicken swallowed Millipede.

Then, Chicken met with Millipede's Mother.

"Mother, help! Chicken swallowed me!" cried Millipede from inside Chicken.

Millipede tasted bad. 

Chicken felt sick.

Chicken started coughing.

Chicken coughed out Millipede.

Chicken and Millipede are now enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago, the cats and the mice were friends. They worked together and played together. 

Cats married mice and mice married cats and they were happy.

But over time, the mice became worried. "Some of our relatives have disappeared," they said. "Where are they?" "I haven't seen my uncle for a long time," one mouse said. 

"And I haven't seen my aunt," said another mouse. "My sister isn't here anymore," a third mouse said. "And where's my brother?" said a fourth mouse.

An old mouse shook his head. He looked sad. 

"I have bad news for you, my friends," he said. "The cats are eating us. We must be very careful. Soon they will eat us all."

The mice were very frightened. 

The mothers said to their children, "Don't go outside. Be careful. The cats will catch you."

All the mice were careful now. 

They stayed inside their holes. They did not like to go outside.

Now, the cats were worried too. "Where have all the mice gone?" they said. "We're hungry. We haven't got anything to eat." 

"They're hiding from us," a big cat said. "How can we catch them?"

"I've got an idea," another cat said. "Let's go and visit the mice and arrange a wedding. We'll ask for one of their daughters to marry one of our sons. 

There'll be a feast and they'll all be together in one place. We can catch them all at the same time. It will be a great feast for us!"

"That's a very good idea," said all the other cats. 

So, the cats sent their elders to the mice. 

"Give us one of your daughters," they said. "We want a wife for one of our sons."

The mice were very surprised. "We don't trust you," they said. "You only want to eat us." 

"No! No!" answered the cats. "We're very honest and sincere and want to be your friends. It's true, a long time ago some of us ate some of you. But we must forget that now. We'll never eat you again."

The mice looked at the cats. The cats were all smiling. 

"All right," the mice said. "We agree. We will give one of our daughters to one of your sons."

The cats went home happily. 

"The wedding day will be wonderful," they said,  licking their lips.

The wedding day came. The mice were still very worried. "Stay near your holes," they said to their children. 

"Look, the cats are coming. If they're nice to us, we'll be nice to them. But if they try to eat us, we'll be ready."

The cats came down the road. 

They were singing a wedding song.

"Can you hear the words of the song?" an old mouse asked a young one. 

The young mouse said, "Yes. They are singing, 'Catch them and eat them. Catch them and eat them!'"

"Then we must sing too," said the old mouse. 

He began to sing, "Run, mice, run! Run, mice, run!" 

All the mice jumped into their holes and escaped.

The cats arrived and asked each other, "Where is the bride for our son?" 

The old mouse put his head out of his hole. "We've learned our lesson," he said. "When your enemies pretend to be your friends, you must be ready to run away."

------------------------------------------------------------



Daddy lives in Yeoville.



I live in Bertrams, with my mummy and two sisters.



I see daddy when he comes to visit for my birthday.



I would like him to live with us.

I don't know why we don't live together.



------------------------------------------------------------



One day Akadeli, Lucy, Acharait and Mary went to pick wild fruits. 

They held hands to cross the big river.

The girls found a tree full of ripe fruits. 

They agreed to pick the fruits with their eyes closed.

Lucy, Acharait and Mary did not close their eyes. 

Only Akadeli closed hers.

When they opened their eyes, only Akadeli had picked unripe fruits.

Lucy, Acharait and Mary laughed at Akadeli. They left for home. 

Akadeli threw away the unripe fruits. She began picking ripe ones.

Soon, Akadeli filled her basket with ripe fruits. 

She set off alone, crossing the big river.

Half way across the river, Akadeli's fruits fell into the water. 

She was angry and began to cry.

Akadeli saw a big fish and grabbed it.

As Akadeli walked home, a hawk snatched the fish. 

He flew away with it.

The hawk left behind a feather from its tail. 

Akadeli picked up the feather and continued walking home.

She came across a traditional wedding. Dancers were wearing grass on their heads instead of feathers as was the tradition. 

They took her feather and gave her a big bull!

Akadeli reached home with her bull. Her parents and relatives were so happy. Lucy, Acharait and Mary wished they had not lied to Akadeli. 

It was a lucky day for Akadeli!

------------------------------------------------------------



I like to read. 


Nenda ohusoma.

Who can I read to? 


Somereho nj'ani?

My sister is asleep. 


Muganda yange ali huŋenyuha.

Who can I read to? 


Somereho nj'ani?

My mother and grandmother are busy.


Maama wange ni nguhwa bali bbize.

Who can I read to? 


Somereho nj'ani?

My father and grandfather are busy. 


Bbaabba wange ni sehulu bali bbize.

Who can I read to? I can read to myself! 


Nasomere nj'ani? Nesomere samwene!

------------------------------------------------------------



For ages, Wango Hill stood smiling at the middle of Kwere Plains. From its side, came springs which joined downhill to form River Temu. 

Its waters were a gift to the sheep and goats of the area as well as the deer that dwelt in the plains.

Things were all well until Matata became headman. He ordered a path to be cleared from the top of the hill to its foot. 

He wanted it so that he could climb uphill easily and roll gently down to the bottom. 

Wango Hill was angry with the damage to his beard, but he was patient.

During the weekend, Matata's children and their friends would climb uphill to play. 

They would run all over the place, breaking twigs and branches. They lit fires for their games, which they would later leave burning.

Over time, Wango Hill lost patience. The dimples became smaller and smaller as his face turned into ugly wrinkles. 

At last the springs were no more. The deer in the plains migrated because there was no more tall green grass to play in. 

The sheep and goats grew thinner and thinner. Everyone felt the sadness of Wango Hill.

The people of Kwere realised that something needed to be done. They joined hands and overthrew Matata, the headman. 

In Matata's place, they appointed Baraka. Baraka immediately ordered everyone to plant a flower to honour Wango. 

Baraka and his people held ceremonies and brought gifts of pine, cedar, and cypress for Wango.

No one walked on the hill any longer, and the grass had a chance to grow tall once again. Gradually, the smile on the face of Wango Hill grew broader and the dimples deeper. 

Out of the dimples the springs ran again. River Temu was revived. The plains became greener than ever before. 

The deer galloped happily once more across the grass.

"Long live Baraka, long live Baraka," the people of Kwere sang. 

"Long live Wango," said Baraka and his people. "May our children and the children's children forever respect you."

------------------------------------------------------------



A prolonged drought dried up the water bodies in the forest. 

Life became difficult for all the animals.

Lion, who was the ruler of the animals, asked everyone to find a solution. "Search for the magic broom," he ordered.

He believed it would bring them food and water.

Clever Hare was lucky! 

He found the magic broom and took it to Lion.

Lion commanded, "Magic broom, bring us food!" 

Immediately, food appeared in abundance for all the animals.

One night, Greedy Tortoise sneaked into Lion's palace and stole the magic broom. 

He hid it under a tree and used it only for himself.

Without the magic broom, the forest faced a terrible famine again.

Many animals grew weak from hunger.

Curious Spider followed Greedy Tortoise and discovered his secret. 

When Greedy Tortoise noticed Curious Spider, he panicked. He ordered the broom to fly away.

The magic broom disappeared, and Greedy Tortoise vanished with it! 

He was never seen by his family again.

------------------------------------------------------------



Where are you going my little goat?

I am going to the market to buy a new coat.

"A coat for a goat?" asked the chicken.

"Can a goat have a coat?" asked the man.

Everyone will laugh at a goat with a coat!

But my little goat likes her new coat. Goodbye goat!

------------------------------------------------------------



A father, his son and their donkey started a long journey. 

On the way, some people asked them why they didn't ride the donkey.

The father invited his son to ride the donkey while he walked.

They continued like this for a while.

Then, other people they met remarked, "Look at this rude boy riding a donkey while his father is walking!"

As a result, the son jumped down and his father rode the donkey.

They continued their journey.

After some time, other people said, "Look at this rude father riding a donkey while his son is walking!"

So the father and son decided to ride the donkey together.

But a few minutes later, some people remarked, "Look at these rude people! There are going to kill the donkey.

Finally, father and son understood that they could not escape from people's remarks.

They decided to use their own minds to do the right thing.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Cat. 

This is Dog.

Cat and Dog want to draw. 

Cat and Dog want to colour. 

Cat and Dog want to make art. Dog starts.

He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. The paper is a square.

First Dog draws an oval. 

The oval is the body of Cat.

Wow, that is simple!

Then he draws two triangles on top of the oval.

The two triangles are the ears of Cat and he draws a black triangle in the oval. 

The black triangle is the nose of Cat and he draws a line above the nose.

Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of Cat.

The eyes are two dots.

The eyebrows are two lines.

Wow, that is easy!

Then he draws the mouth of Cat. 

The mouth is a line.

It looks like the letter ‘w’ and he draws the hairs of Cat. 

Three hairs on the left side and three hairs on the right side.

The drawing is almost finished. 

He draws the arms and legs of Cat. 

The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Cat.

The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Cat. The tail is a long line.

At last he draws some stripes on the body of Cat and he colours the body orange. 

Then the drawing is finished.

Wow, that is beautiful!

Now it is Cat's turn. 

He takes a pencil and he takes a paper. 

The paper is a rectangle.

First Cat draws an oval. 

The oval is the body of Dog.

Wow, that is good!

Then he draws two black forms on top of the oval.

The two black forms are the ears of Dog and he draws a black circle in the oval.

The black circle is the nose of Dog and he draws a line above the nose.

Now he draws the eyes and the eyebrows of dog.

The eyes are two dots.

The eyebrows are two lines.

Wow, that is perfect!

Then he draws the mouth of Dog. 

The mouth is a line. 

The shape is again the letter 'w' and he draws some dots around the mouth of Dog. 

Three on the left side and three on the right side.

The drawing is almost finished. 

He draws the arms and legs of Dog.

The arms and legs are lines and he draws the toe of Dog.

The toes are circles and he draws the tail of Dog. The tail looks like a flower.

At last he draws some black circles on the body of Dog and he colours the body yellow.

Then the drawing is finished.

Wow, that is wonderful!

Bye bye Cat.

Bye bye drawing of Cat.

Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye drawing of Dog.



------------------------------------------------------------



Chicken and Millipede were friends. But they were always competing. 

One day, they decided to play football to see who was the best player.

They went to the football field and started their game. Chicken was fast, but Millipede was faster. 

Chicken kicked far, but Millipede kicked further. Chicken started to feel angry.

They decided to play a penalty shoot-out. First Millipede was goal keeper. Chicken scored only one goal. 

Then it was Chicken's turn to defend the goal.

Millipede kicked the ball and scored. Millipede dribbled the ball and scored. Millipede headed the ball and scored. 

Millipede scored five goals!

Chicken was furious that she lost. She was a very bad loser. 

Millipede started laughing because his friend was making such a fuss.

Chicken was so angry that she opened her beak wide and swallowed Millipede.

As Chicken was walking home, she met Mother Millipede. Mother Millipede asked, "Have you seen my child?" 

Chicken didn't say anything. Mother Millipede was worried.

Then Mother Millipede heard a tiny voice. "Help me mom!" cried the voice. 

Mother Millipede looked around and listened carefully. The voice came from inside the chicken.

Mother Millipede shouted, "Use your special power my child!" 

Millipedes can make a bad smell and a terrible taste. Chicken began to feel ill.

Chicken burped. Then she swallowed and spat. Then she sneezed and coughed. And coughed. 

Millipede tasted disgusting!

Chicken coughed until she coughed out Millipede. 

Mother Millipede and her child crawled up a tree to hide.

From that time, all chickens and millipedes were enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------

























------------------------------------------------------------



One day,  Hare was out looking for food. He met Elephant,  who had a pot of honey. Hare asked Elephant,  "Please be kind and carry me. I am weak."

Elephant agreed to carry Hare. Hare got onto Elephant's back and held on tightly. He started eating Elephant's honey straight away!

Honey began dripping on Elephant's back. When Elephant asked what it was,  Hare said that it was from his wound.

They reached a river and found a large buffalo drinking water.

Hare wanted to know who was stronger,  Buffalo or Elephant.

They began arguing. Elephant said she was stronger and Buffalo said she was stronger.

Hare said he had an idea how to find out who was stronger. He asked them to wait for him there.

Hare came back with a long rope. He tied the one end around Elephant's waist and led her away from the river.

Hare tied the other end of the rope around Buffalo's waist and left her near the river.

Hare ran and hid himself in a tree. He shouted,  "Ready! One,  two,  three! Pull!"

Buffalo and Elephant pulled. Elephant pulled Buffalo.

Buffalo pulled Elephant. Neither could win.

From where he was hiding,  Hare continued to eat Elephant's honey.

After he had finished the honey,  he cut the rope closer to Buffalo.

Elephant fell over hard and hit a tree.

Hare went to Buffalo and praised her,  saying that she was stronger.

------------------------------------------------------------



In my home village, there is a trader called Dembe.

Dembe has a big shop in the village.

The shop sells flour, sugar, rice, beans, and many more things.

Dembe and his wife have three children.

The children help in the shop during the holidays.

Each day, Dembe adds up the money they earned.

Dembe has a business book. In the book he writes the amount they earn each day.

He also writes what they spend to buy things for the shop.

Dembe and his wife can afford a big house and a car.

They also keep cows, chickens and rabbits.

This family has a good life. One day, the children will take over the shop. 

But first they will finish school.

------------------------------------------------------------



My name is Esi. I am six years old. I attend  Kotobabi Primary School.

My mother took me to school on the first day.

My class teacher welcomed me to the classroom. We learnt Arithmetic and English Grammar.

My mother came for me at closing time. I said goodbye to my class teacher.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Hare and Hyena were great friends. They did many things together. 

They often danced and sang together.

One day, Hare said to Hyena, "Let us start farming together and we will be rich."

"We can plant a lot of food, harvest it, and sell it to others," Hyena said.

"But what shall we plant?" asked Hare.

Hyena suggested that they could plant maize. Hare agreed. Hare also told Hyena that it was good for them to share duties on the farm. "My work will be guarding the maize from birds," said Hare.

Then Hare told Hyena to till the land, plant, and weed.

Hyena complained that he had been given more work. But Hare said that the work of chasing birds was the most difficult and most important.

"My work is not easy. I will be climbing trees and chasing birds away day and night. And you are not able to climb a tree," Hare explained.

Hyena was convinced by Hare's words. He agreed to till the land alone. It was a lot of work.

Hare did not help at all. After tilling the land, Hyena planted maize in the whole field, alone.

Hyena weeded all the weeds. It was a lot of work. Hare sat on a rock singing: 

"My friend is a worker, I am his adviser. He works like a tractor, I am his manager. The soil he toils, the hills he tills. The seeds he plants, the weeds he cuts. The maize we harvest."

When the maize was almost ready, Hare enjoyed himself singing in the field to keep birds away.

Chasing the birds was not a hard job. He did not sweat at all.

Finally, the maize was ready to harvest. Hare told Hyena that they would share the harvest.

Hare said, "I will harvest everything that grows above the soil. You will harvest what grows below the soil."

Hyena thought that it was a good idea.

Hare said, "I will first get my harvest then you will harvest yours."

So Hare harvested all the maize in the field and put it in his store.

Hyena went to harvest things that grew below the soil. He dug, hoping to get a good harvest. But he only found roots under the soil.

He dug everywhere. He did not find anything to harvest.

Hyena realised that he had been cheated. He was angry. He returned home carrying empty baskets.

In the evening he went to Hare's home very annoyed. He told Hare, "Let us now farm together again my friend."

Hyena told Hare, "This time I will harvest everything that grows above the ground and you will harvest everything that grows below the soil."

Hare accepted. He told Hyena that instead of planting maize it was good to change the crop. They agreed to plant potatoes.

Hyena also insisted that this time they would both do the digging, planting and weeding.

Hare accepted. So they worked on the farm together, singing.

When the potatoes were ready, Hare told Hyena to harvest what grows above the ground.

Hyena went looking for something to harvest. But he did not find anything. He only found potato leaves. He went back home with empty baskets.

Hare harvested a lot of big potatoes. He put them in his store. When Hyena saw Hare's harvest, he was annoyed. "Why did you cheat me?" Hyena asked Hare.

Hare explained that it was Hyena himself who chose to harvest the things that grew above the soil.

Hyena was very angry. He chased after Hare in order to get revenge. But Hare ran away fast.

Since that day, Hare and Hyena have not been friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



After a night of heavy rain, a group of friends were on their way to school.

 They came to the river they had to cross every day. "Yoh! It's stopped raining, but look how full and fast the river is," said Siya.

"Oh no," groaned Linda. "Do you think teacher will be angry if we miss our classes today?"

Linda remembered what the Sea Rescue instructor had taught them in water safety lessons. 

"Never cross a flooded river. Even if you can't get to school," the instructor had said.

Meanwhile, Lungi stepped straight into the river! "I know where the stepping stones are!" he yelled. 

But he soon fell into the water and the strong river began pulling him away.

"Run and get help!" shouted Linda. "Tell them to call the free emergency number ‪112‬, like the Sea Rescue lady told us."

"Help, help!" shouted Lungi as he struggled to keep his head above the water.

"Hold on, Lungi!" shouted Phelelani, as he grabbed a branch that he could use to help his friend. 

Phelelani's class had been taught that they should never go into the water to help someone as they might also be washed away.

Luckily, Lungi could float. He managed to grab the branch that Phelelani held out to him. 

Phelelani pulled Lungi to the safety of the river bank.

The children walked back to Lungi's home with him. He was soaking wet but relieved to be alive. 

His mother was very thankful that he was safe. 

"Thank you!" she said to Phelelani. "You saved my boy because you knew what to do!"

Lungi's father hugged his son. 

"I know you really wanted to go to school," he said to Lungi. "But always remember the Sea Rescue lesson. If the river is flooding, don't cross it! Call an adult for help."

The next day, when the river was back to normal, the children could cross it and go to school. 

They told the teacher what had happened.

"Wow! That was frightening!" said teacher. "The most important thing is that Lungi is safe. I am sure you will never try to cross a flooded river again." 

"Let's talk about this in class today so everyone knows how dangerous rivers can be," added teacher as the lesson began.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time there was a hyena and a monkey.

The hyena and the monkey had an argument. They went to a judge to settle their differences.

After the judge listened to their case he was afraid to pass judgement on their case.

He thought to himself, "If I condemn the hyena, it will eat all my cattle. And if I condemn the monkey, he will eat up all my corn! So, what am I to do?"

The judge thought for a while, and said, "The case is too difficult for me to judge alone. You should go to the elders of the village." 

So the hyena and monkey went to the elders.

They told the elders about their disagreement.

After the elders listened to their case, they were also afraid to pass judgement.

If they supported the monkey, the hyena might eat their cattle. If they supported the hyena, the monkey might eat their corn. The elders told the Hyena and Monkey that their case was very difficult.

Suddenly, the elders remembered a poor woman in the town. She had nothing to lose, neither cattle nor corn. 

"She can pass the judgement without any fear," said the elders to one another. They told the two animals to go to her.

They arrived at the poor woman’s house and asked her to give them judgement. She agreed.

But, she told them to speak to her separately, one by one.

First the poor woman called Hyena and said, "You are respected, a big animal, and a hero. How could you quarrel with this small and miserable monkey?"

The poor woman said to Hyena, "If people heard about this disagreement, they would look down on you. Stop the quarrel with Monkey."

"Of course you are right,” said Hyena. “I will drop this case. I will end the argument."

Then the poor woman called the monkey and she said, "You are smart and pretty. Why do you argue with this dirty, smelly animal who eats rotten things? What will people think of you when they hear about your argument with this ugly creature?"

After a while Monkey said, "You are right! I will drop this case."

After that, the poor woman called both of them and said, "You both agreed to drop this case. So, you should forgive each other."

Both animals apologised to each other and settled their dispute. 

When people from the town heard this story, they were surprised. The poor woman solved the problem that the judge and the elders failed to solve.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mr. Hot Pepper had a very beautiful daughter. Her name was Dookenger. 

Many suitors desired to marry Dookenger, and so they came to ask for her hand in marriage.

Mr. Hot Pepper had a large pepper farm in his backyard. 

All suitors that came for his daughter would weed grass from the pepper farm.

Suitors that came when the pepper had ripened would  pluck it from the farm. 

They would work hard, but he would not let any of them to marry his daughter.

He told suitors who came when others had plucked the ripened pepper, "I served my father in-law for three years before I married my wife." 

He asked them to sun-dry the pepper as part of the bride price.

When the pepper had dried up, he asked the next set of suitors to put the pepper into bags.

They would pack the pepper with teary eyes and running noses.

The suitors worked very hard. He still refused to let any of them marry his daughter.

One day, all the suitors assembled in his house. They all demanded, "We have had enough. You must let one of us marry Dookenger. The losers will walk away."

He thought of what to do.

He decided to place a large basin of hot pepper before them.

"Anyone who chews six of those peppers will marry Dookenger," he said.

Dookenger's suitors all gathered the following day. Mr. Hot Pepper stood before them with his daughter. He said sternly, "Anyone who chews six pieces of pepper and experiences a burning sensation in the mouth, will not marry my daughter!"  

He thought that they would all fail the pepper test.

So many people lined up to take the pepper test.

They would bite it and try to chew but would spit it out! "Sh...sh....sh...water! Give me water...!"

This continued all day long until evening! Nobody had been able to chew one pepper.

Rabbit came along and asked, "Can you permit me to sing along as I chew the pepper?"

"Yes, go ahead," Mr. Hot Pepper said.

Rabbit began to chew the pepper and sing, "Mr. Hot Pepper, 'sh', Mr. Hot Pepper, 'sh', your daughter, 'sh' when she's matured, 'sh', and someone comes, 'sh' for her hand, 'sh'  you pluck, 'sh' six pieces, 'sh' of hot pepper, 'sh'  and give him, 'sh'...."

".......and when he chews, 'sh' and the pepper hurts, 'sh' he loses her!" 

This was how Rabbit tricked Mr. Hot Pepper and chewed all the six pieces of hot pepper.

Mr. Hot Pepper could not do anything else but give out Dookenger to Rabbit to take home.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Dog found eggs at the river.

Dog put the ten eggs in his bag.

Dog looked after the eggs and kept them warm.

Crocodile asked Dog, "Have you seen my eggs?"

Crocodile asked all animals about her eggs.

Meanwhile, the eggs hatched one by one.

Dog could not give the young crocodiles enough food.

One day, Crocodile heard the rumbling bellies of young crocodiles!

Crocodile went inside and hit Dog with her tail.

Crocodile chased Dog down the road.

Dog stopped and said to Crocodile, "I am sorry!"

Crocodile forgave him and went to swim with her children.

------------------------------------------------------------



Tasneem was a beautiful girl and her grandmother was very kind.

Her grandmother spent many hours making a handsome makgabe for Tasneem. Tasneem loved to wear that apron.

The other girls were jealous of Tasneem's makgabe. They thought that it would be better to get rid of it. 

But it is a difficult thing to take a person's clothes when that person is wearing them.

One morning the girls invited Tasneem to go swimming with them in a river nearby. 

At the river bank, they all took off their makgabes so that the cloth would not be damaged. Then they jumped into the water and splashed around for some time.

They finished swimming. The leader of the jealous girls threw Tasneem's makgabe into the river, near the place of a large snake. The other girls left Tasneem crying by the river. 

The very large snake heard someone weeping. He saw the beautiful Tasneem. He swallowed the makgabe and Tasneem!

Fortunately for Tasneem, the snake did not like the taste of the makgabe. He spat it out. He also spat out Tasneem. 

She lay on the river bank, covered with slime from the snake's stomach. This slime smelled very bad.

The smelly Tasneem ran home to her parents. She sang, "Mother, open the door for me, I am smelly. Mother, open the door for me, the smell is very bad." 

Her mother heard Tasneem and ran out of the house. She sang back to the girl, "Go away, you are smelly. Go away, the smell is very bad."

Tasneem was very upset. She ran off to the house of her aunt and uncle and sang, "Open the door for me,  I am smelly. Open the door for me, the smell is very bad." 

They heard Tasneem and ran out of the house. They sang back to the girl, "Go away, you are smelly. Go away, the smell is very bad."

Tasneem had only her grandmother's house to go to. Her heart was heavy. She thought nobody wanted to look after a smelly child.

But she was wrong. Her grandmother did not send her away. She washed Tasneem, and her makgabe. Soon Tasneem was no longer smelly, she was clean.

Tasneem stayed with her grandmother for many years. 

One day the son of a rich chief asked her to marry him. Tasneem's parents heard about the marriage. They wanted her to come back to live in their house.

Tasneem told them that she would never go back to their house.

"Parents must love their children," she said, "even if their children are smelly."

Instead Tasneem invited her grandmother to live with her in the house of this rich chief and his son. 

Her grandmother was very happy, and very comfortable, and felt very important.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once, there lived a farmer who had two little sons. They were called Momoh and Sorie. The boys were twins.

They loved to eat rice. Every day after school, they went to meet their father at the farm.

Each time, the boys took rice with them.

Along the road to the farm lived Monkey. 

Monkey loved to eat rice too.

Whenever Momoh and Sorie passed by the forest, Monkey threatened them. 

He said, "You small boys, give me what you have in that basket. If you do not give it to me, I'll do something bad to you!"

Momoh and Sorie were afraid. They gave the rice to Monkey and he ate it hungrily. Monkey told the boys not to tell their father.

This happened every day. Momoh and Sorie were afraid to tell their father.

The two boys became thinner by the day. Their father noticed this and asked them why it was so.

"Along the road to the farm, lives Monkey. He takes our rice every day and eats it," cried Momoh.

"He says if we don't give him the rice, he will do something bad to us," Sorie said crying as well.

"Why didn't you tell me?" their father asked sternly.

"Monkey says we should not tell you," the boys replied together.

The father looked his sons in the eyes and said, "Didn't I tell you not to keep secrets from me?"

Momoh and Sorie remembered that quite well and they kept quiet. 

Their father said, "Now, I will teach you how to trick Monkey."

When Momoh and Sorie next went to the farm, they carried a bigger basket with them. 

They reached the spot where Monkey always waited, and he came out to meet them.

Monkey threatened the boys. He said, "You small boys, give me what you have in that basket. If you do not, I will do something bad to you." 

Momoh and Sorie gave Monkey the basket.

When Monkey opened the basket, a big dog jumped out and bit him! 

Monkey cried in pain and ran into the forest.

Since that time, Monkey has not returned. 

The twins grew up and became famous farmers.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a village near a lake.

There lived a young girl. Her name was Atieno.

Atieno's father was a famous fisherman. He had his own little fishing canoe. 

Atieno enjoyed going fishing with her father.

Atieno loved to watch the boys play football. 

"Let me play with you," she begged them one day. 

The boys laughed at her, "Go and play hide and seek with girls. "

Girls said to Atieno, "Your legs are too long." Atieno was sad. 

Each morning, Atieno danced alone with the sun.

The sun became her friend.

One day, the sun did not rise. Cocks did not crow. Birds did not sing. Children did not go to school. Even her father did not go fishing.

Atieno was sad. "Where is my friend, the sun? Why is it so dark today?"

Atieno told the other children how sad she was. But they laughed at her, "Perhaps your friend the sun, is dead. Or perhaps it ran away from you."

Atieno said, "The sun is my friend. It cannot die."

Atieno was so sad that she ran to the house. 

She kicked her brother's ball very hard.

Atieno thought, "I will play with this ball until my friend, the sun returns." 

She picked up the ball and ran out with it.

Atieno put the ball on the ground. She thought, "I can play just like those boys." 

She kicked the ball hard. It went up and up into the cloudy sky.

Everybody stared up. The ball disappeared into the thick clouds. 

There was total silence.

Suddenly, the thick clouds cleared. The sun appeared. Life returned to the village once again. 

Everybody prepared to do what they always did.

Atieno could not believe that the sun was back in the village. But most of all, the sun was back in her life. 

She told the children, "My friend, the sun is back!"

------------------------------------------------------------



I wake up and make fire.

I boil some water.

I chop the firewood.

I stir the pot.

I sweep the floor.

I wash the dishes.

Why do I work so hard?

When my brother is busy playing!

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Dog.

Dog is in his house. Dog is sitting in his house.

Then someone knocks on the door.

Dog opens the door.

Dog sees someone yellow!

Dog asks, "Who are you?"

It is Cat. Cat is yellow.

Cat's head is yellow. Cat's hair is yellow.

Cat's arms are yellow. Cat's hands are yellow.

Cat's mouth is yellow. Cat's nose is yellow.

Cat's ears are yellow. Cat's eyes are yellow.

Dog asks, "Why are you yellow?"

Cat says, "I do not know."

Dog asks, "Where were you?"

Cat says, "I was at the school."

Dog asks, "Which school?"

Cat says, "I was at the school in the village."

Dog asks, "When were you at school?"

Cat says, "I was at school this morning."

Dog asks, "What were you doing at school?"

Cat says, "I was sleeping."

Dog asks, "You were sleeping at school! Where were you sleeping?"

Cat says, "I was sleeping behind the school."

Dog thinks and Dog writes:

Who: Cat
Where: behind the school
Which school: the one in the village
When: this morning
What: sleeping
Why: ?

Then Cat says, "I was not alone at school. There was someone else."

Dog asks, "Who else was at school?"

Cat says, "Elephant was at school."

Dog asks, "What was Elephant doing?"

Cat says, "Elephant was painting."

Dog says, "What was elephant painting?"

Cat says, "Elephant was painting the school."

Dog says, "How was Elephant painting the school?"

Cat says, "Elephant was painting the school with a big brush..."

Cat says nothing. Cat thinks.

Then he says, "Now I know why I am yellow!"

Cat and Dog walk to the school.

Elephant is painting the school.

Elephant is painting the school yellow.

Elephant painted everything. 

Not only the school, but Elephant also painted Cat!

Bye bye yellow Cat.

Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye Elephant.



------------------------------------------------------------



Beam has a fresh breath and a brilliant smile!

What is her secret?

Beam uses her red toothbrush to brush her teeth.

She brushes briskly, twice a day with toothpaste.

One bright morning after breakfast, Beam did not feel like brushing her teeth.

"I will take a brief break from my toothbrush!" she thought.

But, Beam's break from brushing was not brief. 

Beam did not brush for three weeks!

"I do not need my red toothbrush anymore," said Beam.

Her teeth began to turn brown.

She lost her bright smile and fresh breath.

"You need to put the brakes on your break!" said Beam's best friend.

What will bring back Beam's fresh breath and brilliant smile?

Do you know?

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a hungry Jackal.

He tried to catch a bush rat, but the rat ran away.

He tried to catch a squirrel, but the squirrel ran up a tree. Then Jackal saw a fat little mouse. "That mouse looks delicious to eat," he thought.

The mouse saw Jackal. It ran under a big rock, and jumped into its hole.

"I must dig the mouse out of its hole," thought Jackal.

Jackal began to dig. But he dug too far and too deep. The rock fell down on Jackal's paw. He couldn't pull his paw out from under the rock.

"I'm trapped! Help! Help!" Jackal shouted.

Rabbit heard Jackal and ran up to him. "What happened to you?" she asked.

"I was hunting a mouse and this rock fell on my paw. Please, kind Rabbit, help me!" cried Jackal.

"I'd like to help you," said Rabbit. "But I'm small and weak and this rock is big and heavy. It will be hard work. What will you give me if I help you?"

"Oh, I'll make all your favourite dishes for dinner," replied Jackal.

So Rabbit agreed to help Jackal.

Rabbit pushed the rock. It didn't move. She pushed again and again and again.

At last the rock rolled off Jackal's paw. Rabbit smiled.

"Where's my reward?" asked Rabbit. "There's no reward. I'm going to eat you," snarled Jackal.

"But I helped you! You promised a reward!" shouted Rabbit. "I'm a jackal and you're a rabbit. Jackals eat rabbits," snapped Jackal.

"Wait! We must find elders and ask advice," begged Rabbit.

Jackal and Rabbit found an old man.

"Please help us," Rabbit said. "Jackal wants to eat me but I saved his life. A rock was on his paw and he couldn't escape. He promised to reward me. I pushed the rock off his paw. He has forgotten his promise."

"That's not right," the old man said. "Jackal, you are ungrateful."

 Jackal opened his mouth. He showed the old man his sharp teeth. "No," he said. "Don't try to stop me eating the rabbit, old man, or I'll eat you too."

The old man looked frightened.

"Please don't eat me," the old man said. "Perhaps I was wrong. Perhaps you are right after all. I can't decide until I have seen the rock. What happened exactly?"

"Oh, that's easy," Jackal said. "Come, let me show you."

So the old man went back to the rock with Jackal and Rabbit. "What were you doing?" he asked Jackal.

"The mouse I was hunting ran into its hole, so I was digging it out. The rock fell on to my paw," said Jackal.

"Which rock?" asked the old man. "This one," answered Jackal. "And where were you?" asked the old man. "I was here," Jackal replied.

The old man looked at Rabbit. "You're only a little rabbit, small and weak. I don't believe you could move that big rock," the man said.

"But I did! I did!" cried Rabbit. "Show me then," the old man said.

Rabbit pushed and pushed. The rock fell back on to Jackal's paw.

"Did you find Jackal like this?" asked the old man. Rabbit nodded.

"Good," said the old man. "Then it's all fair now. Run away Rabbit and go home. I'm going home too."

And so, the old man and Rabbit went away.

They left the ungrateful Jackal trapped by the rock.

------------------------------------------------------------



I always wear a mask when I go out.

A mask protects me. And it protects others.

I wash my hands with soap and water before I leave home.

And when I arrive home, too.

When I greet my friend, we only touch our elbows!

My grandfather was very sick. He went to hospital.

Dad called every day for news about grandfather.

Grandfather was fit and healthy before he got sick.

He got better.

Then, my brother started coughing.

"My throat is sore," he said.

"Cough into your elbow!" said auntie.

"Wear a mask. Keep your distance! Stay in your bed!" she told him.

So, my brother stayed in his bed and read.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Elephant met with Rat and began laughing.

Rat asked, "Why are you laughing?"

Elephant replied, "You are such a little creature. It is easy for other animals to eat you."

After this conversation, they went their separate ways.

On another day, Rat was passing through the field. 

She saw some colourful flowers and stopped to admire them.

While Rat was enjoying the beauty in nature, she shifted her attention to something else. 

Lion was hiding nearby in the tall grass.

Rat realised that Lion was watching Antelope.

Lion was waiting for the right time to catch Antelope.

Rat thought of how to save Antelope from Lion. 

As Lion began to move, Rat ran up onto his back.

Rat sank her teeth deeply into Lion's neck.

Lion roared with pain and jumped up in the air.

Antelope ran away to safety.

The next day, Antelope met Elephant.

Antelope told him what happened. "Rat saved me," she said. 

Elephant felt bad for laughing at Rat.

Elephant asked Rat to forgive him. 

Rat responded, "I forgive you. Do not judge anyone by their size!" 

Elephant promised to apply Rat's advice.

------------------------------------------------------------



Dog and Jackal were Sekamana's workers.

They hunted for him during the day.

They guarded his compound at night.

Each evening, Sekamana ate good meat for dinner.

But he gave only bones to Dog and Jackal.

One day, Jackal said to Dog, “We must rebel against Sekamana’s bad treatment. Run away with me!”

But out of respect and fear, Dog decided to stay. 

Jackal ran away.

Soon, Sekamana noticed that Jackal was gone. "Where is my brave hunter?" he asked Dog. 

Dog told him the whole story.

Since then Jackal has not returned.

He hunts by himself and eats the meat he has hunted.

But Dog is still eating bones.

------------------------------------------------------------



It was time for animals to sleep. One did not obey.

The farmer asked Piggy to go into the pen. She refused.

The farmer asked Trusty Whip to whip Piggy. He refused.

Fiery Fire refused to burn Trusty Whip for disobeying.

Clear Water disobeyed the farmer by not putting out Fiery Fire.

The farmer asked Milky Moo to drink Clear Water.

Milky Moo said, “I will drink the water. I am thirsty.”

Clear Water cried, “Don’t drink me. I will put out Fire.”

Fiery Fire shouted, “No, you won’t. I will burn Trusty Whip.”

Trusty Whip cried, “Please don’t burn me. I will whip Piggy.”

Piggy was annoyed. “I will go into the pen.”

Piggy went into her pen and was ready for bed.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, in a Turkana village, people loved to dance edonga, the traditional dance.

Turkana County is found in northwestern Kenya. It is an arid and semi-arid region.

Every evening they gathered together and danced edonga. 

The whole region came to know of this village and its dancers.

People from nearby villages also came to this village to dance.

A stranger heard of the famous village. 

He sent his messenger to go there before him.

When the messenger arrived, the villagers were afraid. They wondered who he was, and why he had come. 

The villagers prepared food and animals to be slaughtered.

The villagers gathered and waited. They sat the whole day until evening. 

But the stranger did not arrive.

That night, the villagers danced as usual until midnight. 

There were many dancers. Everybody in the village was excited.

While they were dancing, the stranger arrived. 

Although he was a stranger, he looked just like the other villagers. They did not notice him at first.

When it was the stranger's turn to dance, he joined the men. 

But his dancing was strange and different from the others.

People were amused and began to laugh at the stranger. 

Some dancers fell down laughing. Some sat down, and others knelt laughing.

The stranger did not like people laughing at him. He decided to curse them. He stopped dancing and everyone became a stone in the position they were in. 

Some were lying down, others standing, others sitting and kneeling. Then the stranger left the village.

Since then, those stones remained there. 

At night they can be heard singing and dancing edonga. 

That is how we have the site of Namorutunga in Turkana County.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time,  there was a young man called Pontshibobo. When he was little he was a very good boy. He had grown into a very good man. He respected everybody he met.

Pontsihibobo had a friend called Hippo. He was not respectful like Pontshibobo. One day Pontshibobo and Hippo were walking down the street together. Hippo had an idea,  "Let's go and smoke a zol," he said.

Pontshibobo was surprised. "Why do you ask me to smoke with you?You know that I don't smoke."

Hippo got cross. "If you don't want to smoke with me you can't be my friend," he said and walked off.

Pontshibobo went home and sat under the tree in his yard and cried.

"Why are you crying?" asked the tree. Pontshibobo got a huge fright. He had never heard a tree talking before. He told the tree about Hippo. "I have lost a friend," he said.

The tree asked Pontshibobo,  "What do you really wish for?" Pontshibobo thought for a while. Then he replied,  "I want a house. I am grown up now and I want a home. I want to marry and have children."

The tree also thought for a while. "Take my leaves and my branches and build yourself a house with them," he said. Pontshibobo did as the tree told him and he built a small,  beautiful house. He married and had children. He was happy.

But the tree was not happy. Pontshibobo had forgotten all about him and he felt sad. "I need a friend," the tree said to himself,  "or else I will die." Just at that moment Pontshibobo came into the yard. He heard what the tree said,  and he saw that the tree was very sick.

Pontshibobo was also sad. He had forgotten all about the tree that had helped him build a house for his wife and children. "I am so sorry," he cried and gave the tree a big hug.

When the tree saw that his friend was back he smiled. He grew new branches and fresh leaves.

Pontshibobo's children climbed up the branches of the tree. Pontshibobo and his wife sat in the shade after a long day at work. They told stories and laughed and were happy. Pontshibobo and the tree were friends forever.

------------------------------------------------------------



The bus stop in my town was full of people.

The bus conductor shouted, "Going to the city! Leaving now!"

People pushed to get on the bus.

Women with children sat down. 

The journey was going to be long.

I sat at the window, next to a man.

I thought, "I am going to the big city! I will miss home."

There were many hawkers selling their goods.

Some passengers bought things. 

I had no money to buy anything.

Suddenly, the driver blew the horn. 

It was time to leave.

The hawkers pushed each other to get out of the bus.

“When will I return?" I asked myself.

It was hot inside the bus. 

I closed my eyes.

I thought about my mother and brother at home.

Gradually, I fell fast asleep.

Many hours later, I woke up. 

Almost everyone had left.

It was time to find my uncle’s house.

------------------------------------------------------------



A farmer had an old ox.

He had a donkey too. 

The ox and the donkey were friends.

In the evening, the ox told the donkey, "I am very tired today."

The ox told the donkey, "I did not rest today."

The donkey replied, "I worked harder than you."

The next day, the ox said, "Today was a bad day."

The donkey said, "When the farmer comes, say, 'Moo!' He will let you rest."

The next morning, the ox cried, 'Moo!' 

The farmer let him rest.

The farmer took the donkey out to plough the land.

The donkey worked hard all day. 

He was very tired when he came home.

The donkey said, "The farmer said he will kill you for meat."

The ox said, "I will work tomorrow. I feel better now."

------------------------------------------------------------



The Izinzawu family was a happy family.

The two girls learned cooking and gardening from their mother.

The two boys went out with their father to hunt.

At dinner time every day, they talked about what they had done that day.

The father usually warned the children not to go deep into the forest.

He told the family about a strange creature that lived in the forest. "This creature is like two of us put together!"

One day, the girls were playing at the river. Suddenly, from behind a tree, there was a strange creature!

The creature had two eyes, two ears, two arms, and two legs.

Shaking with fear, they ran to tell their brothers about what they had seen.

But the boys didn't believe them, "The girls are being silly!" they said.

Eventually, curiosity got the better of the boys.

They followed the girls to the river to see this strange creature for themselves.

They searched and searched but all they could see was the tall grass and trees. 

Suddenly, they heard a noise, and looked up.

Up on a tree swung the strangest creature they had ever seen.

It had two arms, two hands, two legs and two feet. Instead of only one each, like them.

The frightened children ran home to call their parents.

Soon the whole family was at the river to see this creature.

"Don't hurt me!" the creature said, as it hid behind the tree.

Now the family could only see the creature's one foot, one leg, one hand, one arm and one eye.

"I am just like you," continued the creature. "The only difference is that I was made with two of almost everything."

So this was how the Izinzawu family discovered that it was not a creature to be scared of.

It was simply a different form of them.

------------------------------------------------------------



Our safari started in the afternoon with a 3pm train ride to the tourist town of Voi in Taita-Taveta County.

The train station was magnificent with several restaurants where we could have a snack. There was a big lounge where everyone sat and relaxed.

The train traversed through the beautiful landscapes of Tsavo National Park. We saw warthogs, gazelle, dik-dik, guinea fowl, baboons, zebras and a pack of wild dogs.

It was very exciting. We knew there was more to come as we settled in the hotel for the night.

We woke up early to beautiful views of the hills surrounding the town. A tour van picked us up from our hotel and off we went. 

We could even see Mt. Kilimanjaro as we went into the dry and dusty savannah wilderness.

Our first stop was at an open field where we came across a lone rhinoceros.

When we moved closer, he was alert. He looked at us keenly. Then, slowly, he turned around and walked towards a mud pit.

Our guide explained that the rhinos like to cover themselves in mud. This way, they get rid of pests on their skin and keep themselves cool from the scorching sun.

The huge rhino dipped himself in a mud pond and sank in slowly. It looked so refreshing for him.

We moved on, coming across several other small animals. And then, there was a huge herd of buffaloes.

The buffalo calves were standing under their mothers. Our guide told us that is how they get protection from the hot sun and stay hidden from predators.

The buffalos were grazing on the beautiful brown grass, chewing lazily in what seemed to be slow motion.

They seemed to be enjoying themselves. Buffalo horns can be as wide as the height of a grown man.

A huge roar was heard and, suddenly, commotion ensued from the herd. On the far end, we saw dust and animals running in all directions.

What a spectacular sight it was! A huge male lion was chasing after a wildebeest and it soon pounced on it.  Our guide told us this was rare as the lionesses hunt for the pride.

The wildlife service was conducting a census of all the animals. They passed overhead in green helicopters with rangers and scientists collecting data.

The census is conducted every three years to establish the wildlife population.

The lion dragged its kill to a nearby acacia tree.

A leopard sat inconspicuously on a branch of the tree. He had a menacing look in his eyes.

"The leopard is a solitary predator and encounters with its kind are always violent," said our guide.

It was now late afternoon and many animals had gathered near the watering holes to drink and play.

Big elephants drank and sprayed water on themselves to cool down. They were magnificent.

We spent over an hour looking at them without getting bored.

The sun was fading behind the hills as we drove towards the park gate to make it before it got dark. Visitors are not allowed in the park after dark.

We left the animals behind and what a beautiful day it was!

We were soon at the Sala Park gate, near the coastal town of Malindi.

We were spending our night in Malindi before travelling back home.

1. What animals are the Big 5?

2. Name the parks in your country.

3. Which is your favourite animal? 

4. What is a census?

5. Why do you think visitors are not allowed in the park after dark?

------------------------------------------------------------



Near Sinyare village, lived a big snake called Lego.

Apiyo, Ajoh and Atieno went for firewood. Grandma said, "Beware of Lego."

The girls prepared some food. It would be a long day.

Apiyo said, “Let’s be quiet. Lego lives near here.”

Ajoh wanted Lego's teeth. Apiyo said, "Remember grandma's warning."

Ajoh did not care. "I want Lego's golden teeth," she said.

Lego did not find his golden teeth. 

He hid and waited.

The girls heard, "Hssssss!" Lego was ready to bite the thief.

Lego said, "The thief will not pass my test."

Apiyo and Atieno sang very well. They passed the test.

Ajoh could not sing properly. Lego knew who the thief was.

Lego swallowed Ajoh! 

Grandma said, "If only she had listened to me."

------------------------------------------------------------



Long,  long ago,  the sky god,  Nyame,  kept all stories locked in a wooden box, high in the sky. 

People down on earth had no stories to tell and they were very sad. They asked Anansi the Spider to help them.

Anansi spun a long thread,  and climbed up his sticky thread all the way to heaven. "Can I have the stories,  please?" he asked the sky god. 

But Nyame laughed at Anansi and said, "Oh,  these are very expensive stories. You wouldn't be able to pay for them, little spider."

"How much do the stories cost?" asked Anansi. "You'll have to bring me three rare and fierce animals," Nyame answered. 

"Bring a leopard with sharp teeth like spears, a hornet that stings people, and a snake that swallows people whole," said Nyame, laughing. He thought his stories were quite safe.

So Anansi climbed slowly back down his sticky thread to the earth. He thought and he thought, and he came up with a plan. 

He dug a deep hole, covered it with branches and dirt so it was hidden. He went home for supper. 

In the morning, sure enough, a leopard had fallen into his pit. He was furiously scratching at the side of the pit, but he couldn't get out.

"Oh, let me help you,  my dear friend!" said Anansi to the leopard. "Just lie down on these sticks and I'll pull you out." 

Anansi wound his sticky web round the leopard and the sticks, and pulled him up to heaven to show the sky god. 

But Nyame just laughed and said,  "Where are the other two?"

Anansi went back to earth to get the second creature. He thought and he thought and he came up with a plan. 

He filled a gourd with water and picked a banana leaf, and then went to the tree where the hornets lived. 

He held the banana leaf over his head and poured half the water over himself.

Anansi poured the rest of the water over the hornets' nest. He shouted, "Hey hornets! It is raining! Quick, get inside my gourd and it will keep you dry."

Hornets don't like to get wet,  so they all flew into Anansi's gourd.

Anansi quickly spun a web across the opening of the gourd. The hornets couldn't get out, no matter how much they buzzed. 

He carried the gourd up to heaven and showed the sky god. But Nyame just said,  "Where's the last one?" (He wasn't laughing so much anymore.)

Anansi went down to earth again. He thought and thought and he thought, but he couldn't come up with a plan. 

So he asked his wife, who had a very good idea. They found a long thick branch and some strong vines. 

Then, they went to the stream where the snake lived, and began to argue. "The branch is longer!" 

"No, it isn't!" 

"Yes it is!"

Soon the snake came out and asked what the argument was. 

"I was arguing with my wife," said Anansi. "She says this stick is longer than you are. But I don't agree." 

The snake exclaimed, "Of course I'm longer than that stick! I'm very long! I'm a huge snake! Just put your stick next to me and measure!"

Anansi did that. 

And to keep the snake straight, Anansi tied him to the stick with the strong vine.

After tying up the snake, Anansi took him to the sky god.

Nyame had to admit that Anansi had paid his price. He went to his wooden box, opened the lid, and gave all the stories to Anansi. 

Anansi carried the stories triumphantly down to earth. He shared them with his wife, and with all the other animals and people. 

Stories are for telling,  not for keeping in wooden boxes.

------------------------------------------------------------



An old woman had chickens and an old rooster.

Her grandson visited her. She decided to kill the old rooster.

The old rooster ran away to the big city.

The old rooster met the cat running away from her boss.

The old rooster and the cat met the dog running away.

They were joined by a horse which was running away too.

The animals came to a house. They saw thieves inside!

The animals sang loudly to chase away the thieves.

They ate the food they found in the house.

The thieves returned later. The animals attacked them.

The thieves ran away forever.

The animals lived together happily in the house.

------------------------------------------------------------



Cows and goats are important animals in Nuer culture.

Nuer people say that the cow is your mother until your death.

In the ancient days, the Nuer said that you have two mothers.

Your first mother is the mother who delivered you.

Your second mother and her sister are the cow and goat.

That is why Nuer people love cows and goats above all animals.

Cows and goats are used as dowry in the Nuer community.
 
They are given as offerings when there is a problem.

Cows and goats have no comparison in Nuer culture.

------------------------------------------------------------



For the children in every country of Africa

One day, my big sister  Zinhle had this idea. 

"I am going to make masks for those people in the community who don't have masks!" she said. 

"That's a good idea! Let's tell Mama and Baba when they get home!" I said.

When Mama and Baba arrived home, we told them about Zinhle's idea. 

"That's a good idea, my child!" Baba said, and Mama agreed. 

"I will ask our church members to give us cloth to make the masks. Let's ask Gogo to help with sewing."

The next day, the church ladies dropped off colourful cloth and elastic at our house.

Zinhle left some cloth and elastic in a bag outside Gogo's door, with a note asking Gogo to help.

Zinhle started stitching masks and Wandile and I watched her. 

Zinhle is very good at stitching. She stitched many masks. 

Wandile and I counted the masks, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, then, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, then, 100!

Zinhle and Gogo made enough masks for everyone in the community! 

We helped them!

Mama and Baba were so proud.

The next day, Baba and Mama were not working. They decided to give out the masks to anyone who needed a mask. 

Zinhle carried Mama's hand sanitiser and sprayed people's hands. "Remember to wash your mask every day," said Mama.

Now when Zinhle goes to get water, everyone is wearing masks. 

Everyone looks and feels safer.

Later, Mama asked, "Children, what do we do after we touch anything?"

"We wash our hands with soap and water!" Wandile said. "Or use sanitiser," I added.

Mama smiled, "And what do we wear when we go out?" We all shouted, "Our masks!"

1. Wash your hands with water.
2. Use soap to wash your hands.
3. Wash for 20 seconds or slowly count from 1 to 20.
4. Rinse your hands with water.
5. Dry your hands with clean towel or tissue.
6. Now your hands are clean!



------------------------------------------------------------



This is my dog. His name is Bobby. 

He is a hunting dog.

Bobby likes to hunt small animals. 

He also likes to play in the long grass.

One Saturday, Bobby went out alone to hunt. 

He saw a rabbit on a rock. 

Bobby's mouth started watering.

The rabbit saw Bobby looking at him.

The rabbit ran away very fast.

Bobby ran after the rabbit.

He could only think about eating rabbit.

He did not see a big hole ahead.

Bobby fell into the deep hole.

The rabbit ran around the hole and kept running.

Luckily, two boys heard Bobby barking, "Woof! Woof! woof!" 

They ran towards the big hole to help him.

"He is too heavy!" cried the boys!

But they managed to pull Bobby from the hole. 

He was a very happy dog!

------------------------------------------------------------



This is the story of Keeper and his nursery for orphaned animals.

Last month was a busy month at the nursery. 

The first animal to arrive at the nursery was  one-year old Nomsa. She was thin and sad.

But soon, Nomsa got stronger. 

She began to play with the other animals.

On another day that month, a helicopter landed at the nursery.

In the helicopter was a small elephant under a big blanket. 

His name was Ndiwa.

Ndiwa was five days old. 

Keeper fed Ndiwa with a bottle.

One night, everybody was woken up by the arrival of Ambia, a giraffe.

Ambia was five months old. 

She was weak after her long journey.

Because of her long neck, Keeper held the bottle high to feed Ambia.

The last orphans to arrive that month were three hungry cubs. 

They were Kopi, Kepi and Keji.

Keeper and his helpers love all of the animals, even the naughty ones.

They work hard to make them strong.

They hope that one day the orphans can look after themselves. 

Then these animals can return to the wild.

------------------------------------------------------------



Elephant and Hare were good friends.

They found grass and water for their animals.

They liked to play football.

Elephant scored more goals. 

Hare was not happy.

Hare asked Elephant, "What makes you a good player?" 

"My big legs."

Hare and Elephant ran a race. 

Hare won.

Elephant asked Hare, "What makes you a good runner?" 

"My thin legs."

Elephant asked, "How can I get thin legs?" 

"I will show you how."

Hare said, "Stand in the fire." 

Elephant did. He cried, "I am burning!"

Hare told Elephant, "This is the only way your legs can become thin."

Elephant moved out of the fire. 

He lay down.

For many days, Elephant was not able to stand.

When he was better, he walked home to his family.

Hare was very sorry. He asked Elephant to forgive him.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Cassava and Palm lived in a village called Koowa. They were very good friends. They visited each other every day. 

They were farmers. They worked very hard on their farms.

In a certain year, there was no rain. The crops did not grow well. All the plants dried up. People did not have any food to eat. 

Cassava and Palm decided to travel to another village to look for work.

On their way, they met a woman. "Good afternoon," they greeted her. 

She responded and asked, "Where are you going?" "We are going to the next village to look for work," said Palm.

"What work can you do?" the woman asked. 

The friends responded, "We can provide food for your family and animals."

The woman asked, "What do you need to provide the food?"

"Give us land, water and good care," they replied.

The woman took them home with her.

One afternoon, Palm tree and Cassava had an argument. Cassava said he was more important than Palm. 

Palm said he was more important than Cassava.

The woman heard them from her room. She came out and asked "Why are you fighting?"

Cassava spoke first. "I am more important than Palm tree. I provide tubers for your fufu, gari, boiled cassava and cassava dough."

"My stems are used for planting. My leaves and peels feed your animals. What does Palm tree do?" asked Cassava.

Palm tree laughed, shook his head and said, "Woman, do you remember the palm soup you enjoy so much? I provide it."

"I provide the palm oil for preparing kpokpoi and the palm kernel oil for frying fish and meat. How would you prepare stews and gravies without oil?"

"In addition, my fronds provide shade for your huts. You cool your heart with my sweet, rich, foamy palm wine after your hard day's work."

"Above all, the brooms that are used to sweep the rooms and compounds come from me," concluded Palm.

"Hmmm!" sighed the woman. "Alright friends, I have heard you. I will settle this problem."

"Both of you are very important to me. The two of you together make a delicious meal, fufu and palm-nut soup!" said the woman.

The woman prepared palm nut soup with fufu from cassavas. She invited her friends to eat with her. They enjoyed the meal very much. 

Since then, Cassava and Palm tree have remained good friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



If someone is in water, you can use a stick to pull the person to safety. 

Never get into the water to try and rescue someone. 

If you get into the water, you could also drown.

If the person who needs help is too far away from you to reach with a stick, you can throw something that floats.

Throw something they can hold on to and use to stay above the water. You could throw a soccer ball or an empty five-litre plastic container.

If someone needs rescuing from water, ask a lifeguard or adult for help. Never go into the water to try and rescue someone yourself. 

You can also call the free national emergency number, 112, from a cell phone or a landline.

If someone is rescued from the water and they are not breathing, you should call 112 for help. 

You can then start Hands-on CPR by pushing hard and fast in the centre of their chest. Do not practice this on a friend!

You can find out more from the National Sea Rescue Institute.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Anansi the spider picked up some yams in his garden. They were very beautiful and very good yams.

He cooked them carefully on the fire. Then he sat down to eat them.

As Anansi was about to eat the first bite, he heard someone knock on the door. "Oh no !" Anansi thought. "Who could it be?" But he opened the door. 

It was Turtle who looked very tired. "Anansi, please let me in. I've walked so far today and I'm so tired and hungry," Turtle said. 

So what could Anansi do except let him in?

Anansi was too selfish to share his beautiful and good yams with anyone. So he came up with a nasty plan.

As Turtle sat down at the table and started reaching out to grab some yams, Anansi shouted at him, "Turtle, your hands are all dirty! You can't eat with your hands all dirty! Go wash them."

Turtle's hands were really dirty. So he crawled gently towards the river, washed his hands and then crawled back to the table.

But meanwhile, Anansi had started swallowing the yams. When Turtle returned, he saw that the yams were gone.

Turtle looked at Anansi. "Thank you for inviting me to dinner. If you ever come near my house, come see me and let me make this dinner for you," he told him. 

And Turtle started crawling slowly towards his house.

After some time, Anansi began to think more and more about the free dinner promised by Turtle. So one day he went to visit.

Anansi arrived at Turtle's house at dinner time as the sun was setting over the river. Turtle was lying on a rock in the sun, warming himself like turtles do.

When Turtle saw Anansi, he said, "Hello, Anansi, did you come to eat with me?"

And Anansi replied, "Yes, that would be very nice, thank you." He was getting hungrier and hungrier.

So Turtle dived to the bottom of the river to set the table for dinner and get everything ready. Anansi waited on the rocks on the bank.

Soon Turtle came swimming back and said, "Oh Anansi, it's ready now, come have dinner with me."

And Turtle dived again and started eating the green leaves prepared for dinner.

Anansi tried to dive to the bottom of the river, but he was a spider, not a turtle, and he couldn't dive that deep. He always came to the surface.

He tried to jump into the river, he tried to dive, but nothing helped. He couldn't come down to eat that dinner.

Finally, Anansi had an idea. He put many stones in his coat pockets and was heavy enough to sink to the bottom of the river. How clever he was!

He saw Turtle's table, full of juicy green leaves and lots of other delicious foods. Anansi's mouth was watering.

But just as Anansi grabbed some of that delicious food, Turtle stopped him. "Anansi, aren't you going to dinner with your coat on? We don't do that at home."

Anansi, without thinking, replied, "Oh, of course you're right, Turtle, what was I thinking?" He took off his coat.

But without the stones in his pockets to hold him down, Anansi immediately rose to the surface of the river and found himself out of the water. 

Anansi sadly put his head in the water and watched Turtle eat all the delicious food!

------------------------------------------------------------



Atabo and Akiru went to the river to collect water.

On their way back home they rested on some rocks.

Atabo tried to stand up to continue home. But she was stuck to the rock. 

Akiru ran home to call mother.

When mother arrived at the rock, she found Atabo truly stuck.

"I will make a fence around the rock to protect you from wild animals," mother said to Atabo.

So, she made a fence. 

And she also made one door for her to get inside.

Then mother said to Atabo, "When I bring you food, I will sing a song for you to recognise me and open the door." Mother also said, "Never open the door to a stranger." 

Whenever she came she sang the song. Atabo would open the door and receive the food.

Hyena was hiding and listening. 

He watched when mother came to feed Atabo.

Hyena tried to copy mother's song. 

He practised and practised for a long time.

The other animals told Hyena to swallow a fly from the river so that he could sing better. 

He swallowed a fly from the river and went to sing. But the door did not open.

Next, he swallowed a fly from the nearby plains and he went to sing. But the door did not open. 

Finally he swallowed a fly from the far away plains.

With this new voice he again went to sing at the door. 

The door opened and Hyena ate Atabo.

When mother came again, she sang, and sang, and sang. But nothing happened. 

So she called a meeting of all the animals and lit a large fire. "The animal that ate Atabo will fall into the fire and burn," she said.

All the animals jumped safely over the fire. 

Only Fox and Hyena remained.

Fox jumped and the fire caught his tail. He cried in pain. 

Last of all came the hyena. He jumped and fell into the fire.

All the animals sang to show that hyena ate Atabo.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is my family. 

My uncle, my cousin, my mother, my two sisters (who always dress the same), my brother, and me!

This is my family on the bus going to see animals. 

On the bus was my aunty, my mother, my brother, my two sisters (who always dress the same), and me!

We saw animals from the bus.

We saw a giraffe.

We saw a springbok.

We saw a lion.

We saw an elephant.

We laughed and laughed at the elephant, because...

...that elephant pooped in a tree!

------------------------------------------------------------



Long long ago people didn't know anything. They didn't know how to plant crops, or how to weave cloth, or how to make iron tools. 

The god Nyame up in the sky had all the wisdom of the world. He kept it safe in a clay pot.

One day, Nyame decided that he would give the pot of wisdom to Anansi. 

Every time Anansi looked in the clay pot, he learned something new. It was so exciting!

Greedy Anansi thought, "I'll keep the pot safe at the top of a tall tree. Then I can have it all to myself!"

He spun a long thread, wound it round the clay pot, and tied it to his stomach. 

He began to climb the tree. But it was hard climbing the tree with the pot bumping him in the knees all the time.

All the time Anansi's young son had been standing at the bottom of the tree watching.

He said, "Wouldn't it be easier to climb if you tied the pot to your back instead?" 

Anansi tried tying the clay pot full of wisdom to his back, and it really was a lot easier.

In no time he reached the top of the tree.

But then he stopped and thought, "I'm supposed to be the one with all the wisdom, and here my son was cleverer than me!" 

Anansi was so angry about this that he threw the clay pot down out of the tree.

It smashed into pieces on the ground. The wisdom was free for everyone to share. 

And that is how people learned to farm, to weave cloth, to make iron tools, and all the other things that people know how to do.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Khalai. She is seven years old. 

In her language, Lubukusu, her name means 'the good one.'

Khalai wakes up and talks to the orange tree. 

"Please orange tree, grow big and give us lots of ripe oranges."

Khalai walks to school. On the way, she talks to the grass. 

"Please grass, grow greener and don't dry up."

Khalai sees flowers. 

"Please flowers, keep blooming so I can put you in my hair."

Khalai talks to the tree at her school. 

"Please tree, put out big branches so we can read under your shade."

Khalai talks to the hedge round her school. 

"Please, grow strong and protect us from bad people."

When Khalai returns home, she visits the orange tree. 

"Are your oranges ripe yet?" Khalai asks the tree.

"The oranges are still green," sighs Khalai.  

"I will see you tomorrow orange tree," says Khalai. "Perhaps then, you will have a ripe orange for me!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there lived a happy family.

The children never fought with each other. 

They helped their parents at home and in the fields.

But they were not allowed to go near a fire.

They had to do all their work during the night.

Because they were made of wax!

But one of the boys longed to go out in the sunlight.

One day the longing was too strong. 

His brother and sister warned him.

But it was too late! 

He melted in the hot sun.

The wax children cried to see their brother melting away.

But they made a plan. 

They shaped the lump of melted wax into a bird.

They took their bird brother up to a high mountain.

And as the sun rose, he flew away, singing in the morning light.

------------------------------------------------------------



Udoo, Erdoo and Eryum gathered around mother. With plenty of love in her heart and her totem in her hand, mother cleared her throat and began the story:
 
There was a little girl called Yana. Yana's aunt told her about a pot of gold at the end of a rainbow. Yana was curious about that pot. 

Did the pot contain gold coins, or lumps of gold in black rocks?

Yana imagined that if she looked at the sky long enough, she would get some answers.

She smiled at the birds. She wondered how the gold got into the pot. 

And, where at the rainbow's end would she find the pot? Yana wished that she knew the exact spot!

As she thought about her rainbow quest, Yana saw a green frog jumping in the bushes. She could not resist, she jumped around with the frog for a while.

Then, checking the sky, she said goodbye to the frog. Yana went on her way in search for the end of the rainbow.

She began to think about the rainbow's colours. In a flash, red came first to mind.

She recalled the day her family almost had a bad accident because a driver didn't stop at a red light. 

Yana was thankful because no one was badly hurt, although they all had cuts and bruises. Everyone got a huge fright.

After red, Yana thought of the colour orange. She loved sweet oranges.

Sweet, sour and bitter were the tastes she experienced while eating oranges.

Thinking about a sour orange made Yana's mouth taste sour! Yuck! Do you know that taste?

Yana's thoughts moved from oranges to a bowl of dark indigo beans, and her stomach made noises. She realized that she was hungry.

Her rainbow quest would have to wait for a while. It was time to eat some food!

She ran into her aunt's kitchen. The air carried the aroma of the fried chicken and fresh bread. 

Yana washed her hands and her nose led her to the food. She ate a little chicken with a large piece of bread, and then she drank water. 

She looked down at her dress. What a mess! Stains from the chicken, and water spilled. So she changed into a beautiful purple dress.

Later, Yana and her aunt went out to the park together. 

They lay on the grass with a book. Yana eagerly peered into the pages itching to finally know more about the hidden pot of gold.

Yana's aunt chuckled at her excitement and they both burst into peals of laughter. They began to read the story together.

It was a tale about how the rainbow colours came to the land of Tonota, and  a little boy called Mpho. 

For the longest time, the people of Tonota only knew the green of plants and the brown of soil. But Mpho had dreams of clouds in glorious colours! 

He told the elders about his dreams. They said, "If you name the colours, we can bring them to life."

The elders asked for the help of rainmakers from across the land, and they gathered together.

Mpho began thinking about the colours in his dreams. Then, these words came to his mind, "Red, blue, orange, yellow, purple, green, and indigo."

The colourful clouds filled the sky!

The clouds hung in the air, and the rainmakers formed a circle, holding hands. The rainmakers looked up to the clouds and the colours formed a beautiful arc. 

This was Tonata's first rainbow! People cheered and rejoiced. 

And just then, Mpho noticed a pot at the end of the rainbow. A pot filled with gold!

"What an amazing rainbow story! Now I know where to find my pot of gold!" exclaimed Yana to her aunt.

Her aunt smiled, happy she shared her favourite childhood story with her niece. "But, no more rainbow quests for you! The pot of gold can only be found by accident!"

With those words, mother finished her rainbow tale. Udoo, Erdoo and Eryum jumped up and gave her a standing ovation. 

Then they held hands like the rainmakers, pretending to make their own rainbow!

"Mother, does every land have its own rainbow story?" asked Erdoo thoughtfully. 

"Yes, my lovelies," said mother. "Tonota's rainbow started with Mpho's dreams of colourful clouds. And remember the Magical Rainbow River and its rainbow ice-cream?"   

"Mmmm, rainbow ice-cream, that's my favourite story," said Eryum looking at mother hopefully as the children gathered around her again.

------------------------------------------------------------



Lola and her family had a party.

Lola chatted with everyone.

Lola and Shola were chatting.

"Look, I am climbing up," said Lola.

Lola climbed up the tree.

She could not climb down!

Lola began to cry.

Shola went to get help.

Everyone came to help. 

They took Lola home. 

She cried and cried!

Lola felt better. 

Everyone went back to the party.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a huge city, humans were fighting with cockroaches over a building.

One day, cockroaches decided to have a meeting with the owner of the building. 

They raised their concerns. "We have a problem with humans. They spray chemicals on us, and only you can help us."

The owner replied, "Well, you guys do not pay rent like humans do. Pay rent if you want me to listen to you. Before that happens, I would like to be left alone."

Cockroaches were very upset as the owner could not help them. They thought of another plan.

The next day, cockroaches built a strong shield that would protect them against any chemical sprayed on them.

Every day, humans would wake up to a pile of cockroaches. They would buy as many chemicals as they could get.

But every time they used them, cockroaches would lay on the floor and pretend to be dead.

Cockroaches were happy that the shields were working.

They all gathered to think of a plan that would make all humans leave the building for good.

Cockroaches decided to attack all humans at night. They planned to eat all their food and destroy their clothes.

In this way humans would get angry and leave the building.

Cockroaches did exactly as they had planned. All humans woke up to a huge mess in the building with no food to eat. 

Humans packed their bags and left the building. Cockroaches lived happily ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------



This house is in Congo. 

I like this house.

We had our own bathroom.

We had our own toilet.

We had a garden. 

I was planting my own garden.

My mother told me, "My mother taught me to plant. Now I am teaching you."

I planted tomatoes and spinach. 

I did it alone.

I would take tomatoes to my mother.

She would say, "Thank you."

We left that house in Congo.

We have no garden here in South Africa.

------------------------------------------------------------



Dedo was a young woman in Ogorme village. She was different to other women. 

She dressed in torn, dirty clothes. She wore the left slipper on the right foot and the right slipper on the left foot.

Dedo did not talk to anyone in the village. She also did not work with anybody.

She would talk to herself, jump and clap her hands.

Sometimes Dedo ate food from the ground. She had never fallen sick, despite eating from the ground.

Nobody had given her medicine, nor taken her to the hospital to be cured of any sickness.

Some people of Ogorme village saw Dedo as mad. Others said she was a witch.  

They insulted her. They asked her not to fetch water from where Ogorme people fetched their drinking water.

Then came the farming season. Dedo had a hoe, a cutlass and a dirty bucket.  

She used the hoe and cutlass to weed the land. She used the bucket to fetch water for use on the farm.

Dedo planted maize and groundnuts. She worked on her farm every day.

The people of Ogorme stood by, watched and laughed at her. She did not mind them and took care of her crops.

Any time she worked on the farm, she would sing, "Laziness kills! Don't be lazy. You will go hungry."

As Dedo sang, she clapped, jumped and danced.

Three months later, Dedo's crops bore many fruits.

It was time for harvesting. The husks of the maize looked green and fresh. The silk was brown in colour.

The people of Ogorme now went to Dedo to beg for maize and groundnuts. 

Even though she freely gave them food, some wicked people went to steal when she was not at the farm.

One day, a stranger visited Ogorme village. He saw Dedo on her farm. He was very happy to see the work she had done.  

The stranger greeted her, "Ayekoo!" But Dedo did not answer.

The stranger did not understand Dedo. He went to the village to find out more about her.

Some of the people of Ogorme village told him that Dedo was mad.

Looking at Dedo's hard work and the farm, the stranger asked himself, "Is Dedo really mad?" 

He said out loud, "Well then, I have never seen a mad woman like her in all my life!"

------------------------------------------------------------



One sunny day, Anina's grandparents visited. Anina decided to make lemonade juice and pies. 

She managed to make the pies, but she did not know how to make lemonade juice. 

"I will make it my own way," she decided.

Anina brought some ginger, lemon, sugar and turmeric. 

She blended them all and added some orange flavour.

She served her grandparents the pies she had made. She also served them the lemonade juice from the fridge. 

When her grandparents tasted the lemonade, they exclaimed,  "Wow! This is tasty,  Anina." 

"Thank you," Anina replied shyly.

Anina thought to herself, "I could do better." 

The next day Anina went to the school library. She found the recipe on how to make lemonade juice.

She followed all the steps and used right measurements for the ingredients. Anina made better lemonade juice. 

She took it to her grandparents. They drank it and said, "This is so sweet, Anina! How did you do it?" 

Anina was so happy.

She took the juice to her mother who drank and said, "This juice is so yummy, Anina."

Anina's mother wondered how she learnt how to make lemonade juice. She asked her, "Who taught you how to make this juice?"

"I learnt if from a cookery book I found in the school library," Anina replied

From that day, Anina's mother always ensured Anina stayed in the kitchen with her whenever she cooked. 

Anina grew up to be a famous chef.

------------------------------------------------------------



Thuli has short hair.

Anna has long hair.

Cathy has the longest hair.

Zama has plaited her hair.

Baba has a beard.

Zanele has combed her hair.

Thabo has cut his hair.

Themba has shaved his hair.

------------------------------------------------------------



Frog and Snake are friends.

Frog says,  "Come with me to visit my mother."

"Thank you," Snake says. "Who will watch our homes?"

"I will watch your homes," says Monkey.

Frog puts white ants in a bag for her mother.

Frog and Snake leave at dawn. They go into a forest.

They meet a gang of squirrels. Snake is afraid.

Frog protects her friend.

They are hungry when they get to Mother's house.

They wash and get ready to eat.

"Snake,  please sit up," says Frog.

Snake tries to sit up,  but she is not a frog.

"I cannot sit up like a frog," says Snake.

Frog will not listen.

"You do not understand me. I am going home."

Snake is annoyed. "I thought Frog was my friend."

------------------------------------------------------------



Odongo and Apiyo lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. 

Not only because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a fishing village near a large lake.

Odongo and Apiyo were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. They packed their bags and got ready for their long journey the next day. 

They could not sleep and talked about the holiday the whole night.

Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. 

They drove past mountains, wild animals, and tea plantations. They counted cars and sang songs.

After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.

Father woke up Odongo and Apiyo as they arrived in the village. They found Nyar-Kanyada, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree. 

In thier language, Nyar-Kanyada means "daughter of the people of Kanyada." She was a strong and beautiful woman.

Nyar-Kanyada welcomed them into the house. She danced around the room singing with joy. 

Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. "First open my gift," said Odongo. "No, my gift first!" said Apiyo.

After she opened the presents, Nyar-Kanyada blessed her grandchildren in a traditional way.

Then Odongo and Apiyo went outside. 

They chased butterflies and birds.

They climbed trees and splashed in the water of the lake.

When it was dark they returned to the house for dinner. 

Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep!

The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nyar-Kanyada.

Odongo and Apiyo helped their grandmother with household chores. 

They fetched water and firewood. They collected eggs from the chickens and picked vegetables from the garden.

Nyar-Kanyada taught her grandchildren to make soft ugali to eat with stew. 

She showed them how to make coconut rice to eat with roast fish.

One morning, Odongo took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. The farmer was angry with Odongo. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. 

After that day, the boy made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.

On another day, the children went to the market place with Nyar-Kanyada. She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap. 

Apiyo liked to tell customers the price of items. Odongo would pack the items that customers bought.

At the end of the day they drank chai tea together. 

They helped grandmother to count the money she earned.

But too soon the holidays were over. The children had to go back to the city. 

Nyar-Kanyada gave Odongo a cap and Apiyo a sweater. She packed food for their journey.

When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nyar-Kanyada to go with them to the city. 

She smiled and said, "I am too old for the city. I will be waiting for you to visit me again."

Odongo and Apiyo both hugged her tightly, and said goodbye.

When Odongo and Apiyo went back to school, they told their friends about life in the village. Some children felt that life in the city was good. Others felt that the village was better. 

But most of all, everyone agreed that Odongo and Apiyo had a wonderful grandmother!

------------------------------------------------------------



One elephant is going to drink water.

Two giraffes are going to drink water.

Three buffaloes and four birds are also going to drink water.

Five antelopes and six warthogs are walking to the water.

Seven zebras are running to the water.

Eight frogs and nine fish are swimming in the water.

One lion roars. He also wants to drink. Who is afraid of the lion?

One elephant is drinking water with the lion.

------------------------------------------------------------



Obinna is a happy boy.

He is happy because he has people who love him.

He wakes up and gets ready for school.

He can't wait to eat the meal father is making.

The meal looks yummy! 

Father is an amazing cook.

Father adds milk to the meal.

Obinna is excited. He loves milk.

After school, Obinna plays football with his friends.

Obinna and his friends decide to read their books.

Then they smile for the camera.

After their photo, they go swimming in the pool. 

Obinna is lucky to have nice friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



Big-head Ant was a good farmer.

He lived in the ground with his family.

They worked very hard on their farm.

Ant's family lived well.

Pigeon was Ant's neighbour. 

Pigeon lived in a tree with her family.

Pigeon and her family did not farm.

They rested all day.

Pigeon and her family were very good singers.

"Share your food?" Pigeon asked Ant.

"No! Go and farm!" replied Ant.

Pigeon flew down and began to sing, "Ant is king!"

"Ant is king! Ant is king! Ant is king!"

Ant loved this song.

After they ate, Pigeon and her family flew up to their tree.

The next day, Pigeon mocked Ant. 

"Do kings have big heads?" she laughed.

"You are ungrateful and lazy!" complained Ant.

"I am sorry!" said Pigeon, and began to sing, "Ant is king!"

------------------------------------------------------------



King Leopard called all the animals for a competition. This competition happened every year. 

Every year King Leopard would come up with a new game for the animals to participate in.

This year the animals were to throw the spear as high and as far as possible. Each animal practiced in their own ways. 

Some of the animals even betted against each other in terms of who would win.

The awaited day arrived. Animals belonged to the Elephant, Warthog or Baboon team. 

King Leopard said to each leader, "I want you to throw this spear as high and as far as possible."

Each team cheered aloud as Elephant, Warthog and Baboon approached the stage where the competition was happening.

The team members started making fun of each other. They also sang songs supporting and comparing Elephant, Warthog and Baboon. 

Baboon laughed, Warthog was scared, and Elephant made fun of them.

Elephant was the first to throw. He used all his might to throw the spear as high as he could.

The spear landed very far. King Leopard congratulated Elephant, and Elephant's team cheered.

Then Warthog threw the spear very carefully. The spear landed very far past Elephant's mark. 

Elephant started crying!

Next, Baboon threw the spear so high, and so far. He beat both Elephant and Warthog. Baboon said, "Yes! I beat them both." 

Baboon's team danced. Baboon was awarded the prize for winning the competition.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once up on a time, there were two friends. The one was clever, the other was stupid. 

The stupid man's wife was clever. The clever man's wife was stupid.

While they were chatting, the clever man said, "Your wife is clever, but you are stupid. My wife is also stupid, so she might be more compatible with you."

The stupid man asked, "Between me and you, who is stupider?" Then he said, "I am as clever as you are." 

"If so, let's go to a judge and I will ask you a question," replied the clever man. They agreed to go.

In front of the judge, the clever man asked, "How many stars are there in the sky? Where is the centre of the world? Answer both questions, or we will swap our wives." 

The judge allowed some time for the stupid man to return with the answers.

One night, the stupid man was counting the stars, sitting on the roof of his house. 

"What are you doing?" his wife asked him.

He replied, "My friend asked me how many stars there are in the sky, and where the centre of the earth is. Now I'm counting the stars."

"Don't worry, I will tell you the answers," said his wife.

She gave her husband a sack of grain, and said, "If they ask you how many stars are in the sky, tell them it is the same as the number of grains in the sack."

Then she gave him a stick and said, "If they ask you where the centre of the world is, push the stick into the ground and tell them it is in the centre. If they complain, tell them to measure it."

The stupid man arrived with his wife's advice. 

First he answered, "The number of stars is the same as the number of grains in this sack." 

Then he pushed the stick into the ground and said, "This is the centre of the earth."

The judge was amused and asked, "Who told you this?" The stupid man replied, "My wife."    

The judge continued, "Your wife is very clever, so she should be with a clever man. You will swap your wives."

The judge set an appointment to swap their wives.

The stupid man told his wife, "I won, but the judge said that you are clever, and don't deserve to be with me." 

His wife replied, "Don't worry I have a solution to this too."

The time came for the judge to swap the wives. The clever wife gave the judge a saucepan of food as a gift. 

When the judge opened the saucepan, he saw a roasted chicken still with all its feathers! Shocked, he muttered, "Oh, I see, so she belongs with her stupid husband afterall!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a boy called Petros. He was a very clever student. He came first in his class and his parents were proud of him. 

But Petros wished he had a brother, a sister, or a pet to play with.

One day he asked his mom, "Can I play outside? I have studied all morning and I want to play with my friends now." 

His mom replied, "All right! Go, but don't be late!"

On the way to the playground, Petros saw something unusual. It was a little dog with white and brown spots. 

The dog was stuck in a hole and he was scared. "Don't worry, I won't hurt you. I will help you," said Petros.

Petros helped the dog out of the hole. He barked with joy, dancing around the boy and licking him. 

"You are going to be my dog," said Petros happily as they continued to the playground.

The dog ran far ahead. When Petros' friends saw the dog running towards them, they said, "This dog might be dangerous. It might bite us." 

They picked up stones and threw them at the little dog. Petros was running and shouting for his friends to stop.

The friends did not hear Petros. The small dog ran as fast as he could to save his life. 

Then he hid from the boys who were chasing him. They did not find him.

Petros' friends went back to the playground and found Petros crying. "What is wrong?" asked one of them. 

"You chased my dog!" cried Petros. They were shocked and said, "We didn't know it was your dog. We're sorry. Let's find him."

"It's no use. We will never find my dog," said Petros in a hopeless voice. 

"Yes, we will find him. Get up Petros, we will find your dog. We must not lose hope," his friends said, consoling him.

Petros and his friends searched for the dog all afternoon until they got tired. 

Finally, Petros said, "There is one last place where the dog could be. If we don't find him there, I will search no more. Let's go to the river."

When the dog saw the boys coming, he was scared. He tried to cross the river but he was scared of the water. 

He was about to jump into the river, when he heard Petros calling, "Stop, don't jump!"

The dog turned around, saw Petros and ran to him. Petros hugged the dog and the dog licked Petros's face. 

"My friend! I thought you were gone forever!" cried Petros.

Back at the playground, Petros gave his friends some advice. "Before you make decisions, think about what could happen as a result. Be careful of hurting others." 

His friends thought about his words and said, "We are sorry. The dog will be our friend too."

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a village called Izagodo. All the people in this village were very young. 

There was not a single old man or old woman in the village.

The young men and women of Izagodo danced and had fun. They ate what they liked and drank anything that made them drunk. They had fun all day and all night.

Very soon, they forgot how to work.

They also forgot anything that happened the day before.

The young men and women of Izagodo woke up one day and all the food was finished. There was not a drop of wine left. The musical instruments were all broken.

There was no music for dancing. But they couldn't even dance anymore because they were hungry and weak.

They went to the compound of Oza, the village chief, and cried bitterly.

They cried and wailed.

The young chief came out of his large hut and pleaded, "Stop! Dear people of Izagodo. Please stop crying. We might die soon, let us save our strength for a few more breaths."

The people shouted, "You are our chief! You must save us!"

Chief Oza was quiet. Then after a while, he stood up and said, "I am no longer your chief. I shall leave this village and find somewhere peaceful. You can choose another chief."

So Oza went into his hut, packed his things, and left.

The people did not know who would be their leader. They did not know what to do. They cried so much more.

Then a small but clear voice said, "I will be your chief!" 

Everybody turned to look for the owner of the voice. They all looked to each other. They looked and looked. But they could not tell who had spoken.

To the surprise of everyone, a little boy stepped out of the crowd. 

The boy said, "Yes! I will be chief. I can help you. But you must promise to stop having fun all day and all night. And you must follow my advice."

The young people were moved by the child's courage and promised to obey him.

He took them away from the village, to a lush farm. They had food and rested. Then he taught them. He helped them to remember how to farm.

With the little boy as their chief, the people of Izagodo began a life of hard work. They worked and worked. 

Before long, they had more than enough to eat and drink. They were happy again and had fun. But also they continued to work.

Many nights the little chief would quietly leave the village, to meet with a wise old man.

He told him moonlight tales, and stories of great men and women who solved the problems of their people. 

In time, the boy himself became a wise and powerful man.

------------------------------------------------------------



We often gathered at grandma's house to listen to her stories. We sat around the fire, under the stars.

Grandmother began her last story for the night, "Hare and Elephant were neighbours and friends."

Hare liked mushrooms, but he was too lazy to farm. So he stole Elephant's mushrooms.

Elephant had planted bananas and pumpkins that year. So there were no mushrooms for Hare.

Hare went without food for many days. Then he decided to steal Elephant's bananas.

Elephant noticed that someone was stealing his bananas. He went to Hare and said, "Someone is stealing from me."

Hare asked, "Who is the thief?"

Elephant began to sing, "I will catch the thief! Aaah! I will catch the thief! Ooo!"

Hare was scared.

Elephant asked Monkey to watch his farm. But Hare did not steal that day or that night. Nor the next day or night.

Monkey became tired of watching.

The following day, Hare went to Elephant's farm to steal again.

When Elephant came to check on his crops, Hare hid amongst the pumpkin leaves.

Elephant saw leaves move and began singing, "I've caught the thief! Aah! I've caught the thief! Ooo!"

Elephant searched everywhere but did not find the thief.

On another day, Hare was there helping himself to Elephant's crops.

Elephant arrived at the farm and Hare jumped inside a huge pumpkin to hide.

Elephant noticed the large pumpkin and said, "Ooo! Here is a big pumpkin. I'll eat that for lunch."

And he swallowed the pumpkin whole!

Hare tried to jump out of the pumpkin, but could not. 

Elephant felt something jumping in his stomach and said, "What kind of pumpkin is this that jumps in my stomach?"

Elephant spat out the pumpkin. Before he could examine it, Hare burst out of the pumpkin and ran away as fast as he could.

Elephant never caught the thief.

Grandmother said, "And that is the end of the story." 

"Thank you grandmother," we sleepily chorused. Then we went to bed thinking about grandmother's stories.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Hen and Eagle were friends. They lived in peace with all the other birds. 

None of them could fly.

One day, there was famine in the land. Eagle had to walk very far to find food. 

She came back very tired. "There must be an easier way to travel!" said Eagle.

After a good night's sleep, Hen had a brilliant idea. She began collecting the fallen feathers from all their bird friends. 

"Let's sew them together on top of our own feathers," she said. "Perhaps that will make it easier to travel."

Eagle was the only one in the village with a needle, so she started sewing first. She made herself a pair of beautiful wings and flew high above Hen. 

Hen borrowed the needle but she soon got tired of sewing. She left the needle on the cupboard and went into the kitchen to prepare food for her children.

But the other birds had seen Eagle flying away. They asked Hen to lend them the needle to make wings for themselves too. 

Soon there were birds flying all over the sky.

When the last bird returned the borrowed needle, Hen was not there. So her children took the needle and started playing with it. 

When they got tired of the game, they left the needle in the sand.

Later that afternoon, Eagle returned. She asked for the needle to fix some feathers that had loosened on her journey. 

Hen looked on the cupboard. She looked in the kitchen. She looked in the yard. But the needle was nowhere to be found.

"Just give me a day," Hen begged Eagle. "Then you can fix your wing and fly away to get food again." 

"Just one more day," said Eagle. "If you can't find the needle, you'll have to give me one of your chicks as payment."

When Eagle came the next day, she found Hen scratching in the sand, but no needle. So Eagle flew down very fast and caught one of the chicks. She carried it away. 

Forever after that, whenever Eagle appears, she finds Hen scratching in the sand for the needle.

As the shadow of Eagle's wing falls on the ground, Hen warns her chicks. "Get out of the bare and dry land." 

And they respond, "We are not fools. We will run."

------------------------------------------------------------



I can run with it.

I can jump with it.

I can dance with it.

I can swim with it.

I can skip with it.

I can kick with it.

I can escape with it.

But I can never fly with it.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was a husband and wife called Yihdego and Tiebe. 

During a drought, Yihdego left home to find a job. At that time, Tiebe was pregnant with their second child.

After staying away for a long time, Yihdego decided to return to his home. 

Before starting his journey, he went to a wise old man for advice.

After Yihdego greeted the old man, he said, "I have been away from my home and family for a long time. Now I want to go back. I need your blessing and advice."

"Listen my son, on your journey home, do not use a shortcut. Do not comment on everything you see. Do not make a decision while you are angry," advised the old man.

Yihdego set off on his journey. He met four merchants. They came to a cross-road. 

The merchants chose to go the short way. Yihdego remembered the old man's advice. He went the long way. 

The merchants who went the short way were robbed by bandits.

After travelling the whole day, Yihdego arrived at a village. He asked many households if he could stay the night, but all refused. 

A man told him, "We don't allow strangers to stay in our houses, but ask over there." He pointed to a house.

It was the king's house. Many did not leave this house alive. Yihdego went there.

He was allowed to enter and was served fine food and drinks. 

The wife of the king was very beautiful.

When he saw the house, Yihdego was inspired to ask, "How did you build this house?" He also wanted to say, "What a beautiful wife the king has!" 

But he remembered what the old man had advised him, and he kept quiet the whole night.

The next morning when Yihdego was leaving, the king called him.

"Everyone who visits my house makes comments about it, and about my wife. You did not, you must be sent by God. Therefore, I will give you gold, grain and mules," said the king.

After many days, Yihdego arrived at home. He knocked on the door, but no one opened it. 

He looked through the keyhole of the door. His wife was sleeping with two young men! He wanted to kill them but he remembered the old man's advice.

The old man had told Yihdego, "Don't make a decision while you are angry."

Moments later, Tiebe opened the door and found her husband there. 

"Come and meet your father," she said to their two sons. They were happily re-united.

Yihdego, with the help of the old man's advice, escaped robbery and murder and became rich. 

He lived happily with his family.

------------------------------------------------------------



King Leopard called all the animals for a meeting.

"How far can you throw this spear?" asked the king.

Elephant tried.

The spear fell near.

Warthog tried. 

The spear flew far.

Baboon tried. 

The spear flew farther.

''Is that as far as you can throw?" asked Leopard.

"I will try," said Antelope.

Antelope threw the spear the farthest of all the animals!

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, in Pen Village, lived many pens.

There was Golden, Bic, Ballpoint, Gel, Marker, and others.

Golden was a pretty girl. 

All the other pens in Pen Village wished to be like her.

Bic was Golden’s best friend. 

“I will be the happiest pen in the whole of Pen Village if I get to be like Golden,” thought Bic.

But Golden was always sad and worried. She chose a lonely life away from all who loved her.

Nobody in Pen Village knew why Golden was always sad and worried. They believed she had all the reasons to be happy.

However, Golden had a big secret only she knew about. 

What was Golden’s secret?

Although Golden was pretty and adored, she had no ink!

“Of what use is a Golden pen without ink?” cried Golden.

------------------------------------------------------------



"Let's play Hide and Seek," said my brother to me.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12…

…92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 100!

My brother was coming.
 
I was hiding behind the curtain.

He looked for me all over the house.

He came into the room where I was hiding.

I was very still. 

I was thinking, "He will find me."

Then, he went outside!

I ran out.

I shouted, "You didn't find me!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Did you know, when you eat fruits you are eating colours?

What colour is an apple? 

Eat all types of apples.

Eat green, red, yellow and pink apples!

What colour is a coconut?

Eat every type of coconut.

Eat fresh coconut and dried coconut.

What fruits are the colour orange?

When is an orange the colour green?

Watermelon is pink.

Pink is my favourite fruit!

You eat colours, when you eat fruits.

An avocado is a fruit with only one large seed.

What colour are you eating when you eat an avocado?

What colours are these peppers?

Every kind of pepper is a fruit.

Fruits are different to vegetables.

Fruits grow from flowers on a plant. 

Fruits have seeds.

Which fruits do you like to eat?

------------------------------------------------------------



In the small township of Thembalethu, near Cape Town, lived a four-year-old boy named Buhlali.

He lived with his mother, father, and nine-year-old sister. Buhlali liked watching television.

One day, his parents took him to the shopping mall to buy a smart TV. They bought it and headed home.

As soon as they got home, Buhlali learned how to use the TV until he was a master.

As time passed, he no longer wanted to play with the other children on his street. He was jealous of the TV, even of his sister.

One day he said to his family, "This is my TV, don't come near it." He always had the remote in his hands.

After sometime, Buhlali started to do strange things. He began speaking English, which he learned from the TV. 

He said, "Mom, I can jump. I am Spider-man." His mother responded with amazement, "Yhoo."

Buhlali continued to do strange things. He started drawing his face like a spider's web with red and blue paint.

His parents knew that he had seen this drawing on television.

While at home, he would always jump and climb on cupboards and windows. He learned many things and seemed to be living in his imagination.

He would come back quickly from playing outside and start to watch TV.

One morning, they woke up to find the door open. His mother asked, "Did you both forget to lock up?" 

Buhlali jumped out of bed and rushed to check the TV. When he saw that it was missing, he screamed loudly and began to cry. The TV was gone.

While they were sleeping, thieves broke in and stole the TV. Buhlali was very hurt. He asked his mother, "Where am I going to watch Spiderman?"

His mother responded, "I will make a plan, my boy."

The following day, Buhlali's mother went to town. She bought a ball so that he could play with other children.

When she got home, she gave him the ball and told him that they would buy another TV once they had enough money.

A few days after getting the ball, Buhlali would go out and play with other children. The experience was new to them because he had only played with them at school. 

Before, he never went out to play with them. He would lock himself inside and watch TV.

After a few days, he looked happy and had forgotten about the TV. 

Every afternoon, he would go and play football with other children next to the gate of his home. They would play and scream while enjoying themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------



One special Friday Yusuf's father gets dressed before a flicker of light brightens the sky. He pulls on his heavy weather-proof jacket and the green woolen cap that covers his ears. He waves his boy goodbye. 

Yusuf's eyes brighten when Papa says, "Today is the day I will catch a fish and bring a gift home for you."

A fish and a gift? Oh, what will it be? Papa cycles down to Muizenberg Beach. Squeak squeak go the wheels all the way to Surfer's Corner. 

Gulls circle the sky. "Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" they cry. "What will you bring back for Yusuf?" Papa rings his bell. "Wait and see what it will be!"

The fishermen watch the sun rise. They check their nets. They check their oars. They listen to the wind. They drag their boats down to the water. 

Yusuf's grandfather, Oupa Salie was a treknet fisherman. Before him his father, Oupagrootjie Ridwaan, knew the sea too.

The boat rides into the waves. Papa's arms stretch to the oar. His leg braces against the side. His neck strains, his back muscles ripple. 

Papa sings as he works: "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."

All day long Yusuf looks at the sky. It is bright and clear and windless. A fish and a gift! What will Papa bring home from the sea? 

Sometimes he brings a beautiful shell. Sometimes he brings a jewel green bottle rinsed by the waves.

Some days Yusuf's father brings a story. Like the time they found sea turtles on the sand, hundreds washed up in a storm.

"Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cried the gulls. "What will you do to help the turtles?"

Papa said, "We saved those turtles, I tell you straight. We sent them back to the ocean, every last one."

Always Papa brings a song. He sings the song while he pulls the oars. He sings the song while he pulls the nets. He sings the song as he winds the ropes.

He sings the song as he cycles home. "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."

Ouma Safiya wants a nice fat yellowtail for her supper. "But we'll be lucky if they catch even a tiny crab. More likely it will be fish tail Friday. There's not so many fish left in the sea," says Ouma shaking her head.

Yusuf holds Ouma's hand. They cross the road at the bathing cabins.

"Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls perched on the bright rooftops. "What is for supper?"

Last year the fishermen fought with the surfers. Angry fists and shouting words.

"Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cried the gulls. 

"There's enough sea for everybody," said Yusuf's father. He showed them the fishing license that had been Oupa Salie's. "Waves for all. Water for free."

Ouma Safiya watches through her binoculars, her fingers curled in curiosity. The shark siren sounds.

Swimmers run back to the sand and grab their towels. Surfers rush to the shore, carrying their boards under their arms. Under the showers they strip off their wetsuits.

"Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls. "What will Yusuf's father bring from the ocean?"

Yusuf's father and uncle and cousins heave and pull. A little shark has been caught. It twists and thrashes in the waves.

Yusuf's father untangles the nets,  singing to the shark: "Drop and swish. Find a fish. Pull and plop. Don't you stop."

When the shark at last is free it streaks back into the waves, leaving only one fat yellowtail in the net. Ouma Safiya will be pleased.

The men pull the boat in and coil up the cables. A hard white triangle catches Papa's finger.

"Whaaat? Whaaat? Whaaat?" cry the gulls. "What did you bring back for Yusuf?"

As the sun goes down, Papa answers the gulls. "A lucky shark tooth for my boy." At home Yusuf holds his gift up to the stars.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Billy-goat lived in a fenced village. The name of the village was Ganhwa.

Goats then had long and bushy tails, like dogs and wolves.

One day, Billy-goat went to the bush to get honey for his family.

As he was returning with the honey pot, rain began to fall on him.

Billy-goat ran into a nearby cave to shelter from the rain. As he entered, he saw Hyena!

Goat was scared, and put down his honey pot, ready to run away.

At the same moment as Hyena moved to attack Billy-goat, Lion ran into the cave!

Billy-goat was so afraid that his head shook and his body shuddered.

At once, all the water on his body flew off onto Lion and Hyena.

"Wao!" Lion exclaimed, "How did you do that?"

"I use this charm called Ganhwa," Billy-goat said, pointing to his testicles.

"That's nice! Make one for me," Lion demanded.

"We need fresh hyena skin, which must be chewed to become soft," Billy-goat said.

Hyena tried to escape but Lion was close to the mouth of the cave.

Lion tore off a piece of Hyena's skin and gave it to Billy-goat.

Billy-goat dipped the skin into the honey pot and offered it to Lion.

"Chew it, but you must not swallow it," Billy-goat told Lion.

Lion chewed the hyena skin. It was so sweet and delicious that he swallowed the piece of skin.

So, Lion took another piece of Hyena's skin. Billy-goat dipped it into the honey and gave it to Lion.

Lion chewed and swallowed the skin each time.

Hyena managed to sneak away while Lion was busy chewing. Most of Hyena's skin was torn off in spots.

When Lion swallowed and looked up, Hyena was gone.

Lion ran after Hyena, and Billy-goat also fled.

Lion returned to the cave, but he did not meet Billy-goat.

Lion pursued and caught up with Billy-goat as he was about to jump the fence into Ganhwa village.

Lion reached out to grab the Ganhwa charm swinging between the legs of Billy-goat.

He caught only the tail.

Billy-goat escaped into Ganhwa village, but some of his tail remained in the Lion's claws.

That is why today, goats have short tails and hyenas have spotted skin.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, there was a man called Kato. He lived in Kabuusu town. 

He stayed with his dog in a small house.

One day Kato was very sick. He had no one to help him. 

When he recovered, he decided he would marry a woman who lived nearby.

He invited friends and relatives to attend the marriage ceremony. 

Kato was very excited because he thought he was getting a helper.

Many things were brought for the bride and her groom. 

These were baskets of millet, mats, bananas,  groundnuts, and other gifts for the home.

The wedding function ended and all the visitors left for their homes. 

Kato was ready to start a new life with his wife and the dog.

The next day, Kato served sweet banana to his wife, but she refused to eat.

When Kato went out to hunt, the woman ate all the sweet bananas.

Kato came back from hunting and he was hungry. He asked for sweet bananas. 

His wife said that the dog had eaten them all!

The following day, Kato went to his farm. When he came home, he found that his wife had eaten all the meat. 

She did not even share with the dog.

Another day, Kato went to visit his friend and when he came back, the woman had eaten all the groundnuts. 

The basket was completely empty. Kato was annoyed with his new wife.

Kato thought, "Something is wrong with this woman." He decided to apply magic. 

He put milk in a magic pot, put the pot under the bed, and went out hunting.

The woman saw the pot, and that it was full of milk. At once, she picked up the pot and put it to her mouth. 

She drank all the milk while the dog watched her.

Unfortunately, the pot got stuck to her mouth. She tried to remove it but all in vain. 

She shouted, and jumped up and down. But the pot stayed stuck. 

The dog watched all this.

Then the dog ran off to find Kato. The dog barked and barked, and jumped up and down. 

Kato realised that something was wrong at home.

They ran home together. Kato was very surprised to find his wife with a pot stuck to her mouth. 

He looked at her and wondered.

Kato touched his wife's cheek and the pot dropped down at once. 

The woman was very ashamed. She decided to go back to her parents' home.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Eagle and Hen were best friends. The two of them were together and chatted from morning till dusk. 

Eagle's chicks couldn't wait to visit Hen's chicks and play with them.

One day Hen approached Eagle. "My friend," she said. "I have to ask you a big favour. Rooster's pyjama pants are torn. He is really grumpy about it. They are his favourite pants. I want to mend the pants, but I don't have a needle. May I borrow your needle?" 

Eagle nodded. "Of course, dear friend," she said. "But please take good care of it. It is an heirloom needle. My grandmother gave it to me." 

"Of course, my friend," Hen said. She took the shining needle. "I'll return it tomorrow."

Hen went away to mend her husband's pants. The next morning, as usual, Hen was on her way to Eagle. But oh, goodness – the needle was gone! 

Hen anxiously called her little chicks together. "Has anyone seen Eagle's needle?" she asked. 

"No, Mommy," the chickens cheeped. "Help me look for it," Hen said.

Hen and her chickens looked everywhere. In every bush. 

Behind every lump of grass. Inside all their nests. But Eagle's needle was gone.

Eagle waited the whole day for Hen to come and visit. By dusk she was getting annoyed. 

She flew to the farm yard. "Good evening, friend," she greeted Hen. "Why didn't you visit me today?" 

"I was very busy," Hen said.

"And where is the needle you borrowed from me?" Eagle asked. 

Hen swallowed. "Oh, Eagle I am so sorry. I lost your needle." 

"Lost it?" Eagle was angry. 

"Don't worry," Hen said quickly. "My chickens and I will find it. It must be here somewhere."

Eagle was very angry. "I can't believe you lost my needle," she said. "The needle I got from my grandma. You'd better look for it. If you haven't found it by tomorrow, I will come and grab one of your chickens." 

The following morning, Rooster had barely started crowing when Hen called on her chicks. "Kids, you must help me look for it," she said. "We'll scratch around this whole farm yard. Eagle's needle must be here."

Look carefully when you see Hen and her chickens again. Up until this day they are still scratching around in the dust, looking for Eagle's needle. 

And when Hen notices an eagle flying in the air, she anxiously clucks: "Quick, little chicks. Hide beneath my wings. If Eagle sees you, she will catch you. She is still annoyed about her grandmother's needle."

------------------------------------------------------------



My friend Dennis from next door called me. 

"Come and see my new dog," said Dennis.

The dog had black spots and a big head. 

It frightened me! 

I felt worried that it would bite me.

We took the new dog for a walk, Dennis and me.

The dog wagged its tail.

It barked!

Then it peed on me! 

On my boot! 

Yuuuk!

Dennis took a tissue and wiped off the pee.

I felt that Dennis was a good friend to me.

------------------------------------------------------------



I had never worn shoes before.

When I saw children wearing nice shoes, I would look at them with longing.

My mother would say, "You will have many pairs in the future, just wait!" 

Sometimes I did not believe her. "When is the future?" I asked her one day.

Time passed and it was nearly Christmas. Everybody was busy going to the market and coming back with bags of new things. 

"Mother, are we going to the market?" I asked her.

The day before Christmas, my mother woke me up earlier than usual. 

She asked me to fetch the big shopping basket she always carried to the market.

At the open-air market there, were many parents with their children. 

They were buying new clothes and stocking up on food.

We went straight to where there were many different types of shoes. 

My eyes were wide with amazement. I gaped at row after row of neatly arranged shoes.

After trying on many pairs, I settled for black lace-up shoes. I couldn't sleep that night. 

I was so excited thinking of how I would wear my new shoes and show off to every child in the village.

After a while, I got out of bed and put on the shoes. I walked gently around the room and then put the shoes back into the box. 

I lay down again, but I couldn't sleep.

I got up and tried on the shoes a second time. 

I strutted around the room for a while and then put them back.

I lay down once more and tried to sleep. But I got up a third time. I put on the shoes and jumped around the room. 

Then I felt tired. I decided to get back into bed.

The following morning, I was woken by my mother. "What is this I see?" she asked.

I was wearing my new shoes in bed!

------------------------------------------------------------



It was a cold and wet morning in the forest. 

Mod the little toad was tired of swimming in cold water. "I need to leave this place during the rainy season," she said to herself.

But Mod the toad was curious. "I must find out, I must go beyond the forest," she said. 

Mod hopped out of the water. Hop, hop, she went, away from the river. She had fun jumping over the rocks, across grass, and past trenches.

Mod carried on her way. She met Chameleon for the first time. He was next to a large puddle of water. 

"Hello, I am on my way to dry land for adventure. What can you tell me?" she asked. 

"Nothing much stranger. It rains here too. Lots of rain and lots of flies," replied Chameleon.

As Chameleon was talking, his body changed colour. 

Mod got a fright. She quickly said goodbye to Chameleon and hopped into a nearby bush.



Mod did not want to turn around for fear of meeting Chameleon again. 

She stayed in the bush, only her round eyes could be seen. They were big with fear. Mod was surrounded by fire!

Mod did not know where to go. The flames began to burn her back. Then the little toad remembered the puddle of water where she met Chameleon. 

She closed her eyes, held her breath, and jumped high in the direction of the puddle.

She was lucky this time. She landed in the puddle,  and the water put out the flames that were burning her skin. But the damage was done. 

When she came out of the puddle, the skin on her back was full of blisters.

------------------------------------------------------------



After a long day at the farm,  it was time for all the animals to go to sleep. 

But not everyone was willing to listen to the farmer.

"Time for bed Miss Piggy," said the farmer. "In the pen you go."  

"Oh no I won't,  I won't go into the pen," said Miss Piggy.

"Trusty Whip,  please whip Miss Piggy into the pen," said the farmer to her trusty whip. 

"Oh no I won't,  I won't whip Miss Piggy," said Trusty Whip.

"Fiery Fire,  please burn Trusty Whip,  he won't whip Miss Piggy into the pen," said the farmer to the fire. 

"Oh no,  I won't,  I won't burn Trusty Whip," said Fiery Fire.

"Clear Water,  please put out Fiery Fire,  he won't burn the Trusty Whip, and Miss Piggy won't go into the pen," said the farmer to the water. 

"Oh no I won't,  I won't put out the fire," said Clear Water.

Then along came Milky Moo, the cow. "Milky Moo,  please drink Clear Water,  who won't put out Fiery Fire. Fiery Fire won't burn Trusty Whip, and Miss Piggy won't go into the pen," said the farmer.

"MOOO!" said thirsty Milky Moo with excitement.

"Of course I will drink the water."

"No! No! No! Milky Moo,  please don't drink me," cried Clear Water. "I will put out Fiery Fire."

"Oh no you won't put me out!" shouted Fiery Fire. "I will burn Trusty Whip."

"Please don't burn me Fiery Fire," cried Trusty Whip. "I will whip Miss Piggy into the pen."

Miss Piggy was annoyed. "There will be no need for you to whip me,  Trusty Whip," she said. "I will go into the pen."

Miss Piggy went into her pen and was ready for bed.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Lion was the strongest and most feared of all the animals. He would catch other animals and eat them.

But one morning while he was looking for his breakfast, he got caught in a hunter's trap.

Lion gave his loudest roar. He pulled and pulled to free himself from the trap. The trap got tighter and tighter around his leg every time he pulled.

Lion grew tired and he felt more pain in his leg. Finally, he gave up.

Days went past as Lion lay baking in the sun. He was hungry and thirsty and there was nobody to save him. He became weaker and weaker.

"I am going to die of hunger and thirst in this trap," he thought to himself.

One morning, Lion heard a sound coming from the nearby bushes. He listened and looked closer. He saw Warthog walking with his family, talking and laughing.

The warthogs were going to the river to drink water and play in the mud before the sun got too hot.

"Warthog! Please help me! Please set me free from this trap," he pleaded.

"Never," said Warthog. "You are a cruel animal. You will eat me and my family if I set you free."

Lion replied, "I promise I would never do such a bad thing. We will be friends if you can set me free."

Warthog felt sorry for Lion. "I do not like seeing you in such pain, thirsty and dying from hunger," he said. 

So he pulled at the trap with his long strong tusks and released Lion. Warthog saved his new friend.

"Thank you for saving my life," said Lion. "I must go to my family now, good bye." Warthog replied, "Go well my friend."

He was happy that Lion was his friend. "My family will never have to run from Lion again," he thought.

Lion walked away limping and weak. He was also very hungry. Then he saw Warthog's children playing in the mud.

"Today is my lucky day," said Lion with his mouth watering.

"Warthog, my new friend," called Lion. "I have been caught in the trap for days without food. I am too weak to hunt. Please would you give one of your children to me for breakfast?"

Warthog was shocked. "I saved you from the trap and now you want to eat my children?"

"I am very sorry my friend," said Lion, "but I am starving. I might be weak right now, but I am still stronger than you." Lion opened his mouth and showed his strong teeth.

"If you do not give me one of your children, I will take one for myself," he roared.

Warthog knew that he did not have the speed or the strength of Lion. He would never be able to protect his children in a fight.

"All right," agreed Warthog. "I will give you one of my children. But first I want you to show me how you were caught in the trap. In case I have to save another lion from such a trap."

Lion imagined the wonderful taste of young warthog in his mouth. He could hardly wait.

He went back to the trap and put his foot inside, to show his friend how he was trapped.

"Ouch!" Lion roared. Warthog had closed the trap on Lion's foot.

"Aha! I got you," said Warthog. "You will stay in that trap hungry and thirsty again. See if your strong teeth and sharp claws can help you now."

"Run! Run! Run away!" Warthog's wife shouted to the children at the top of her voice. "Raise your tails when you are running so that your father can see you," she called.

The babies ran as fast as they could through the bushes.

"Warthog please help me!" begged Lion again. He was in pain from the trap. "I will do anything for you if you save me," he cried.

"No way, liar! I will never believe you again," shouted Warthog. "I will also warn other animals not to save you because you are very sly."

Warthog saw his children running in a row with their mother. Their tails were lifted up for him to see them. He rushed to his family and they all escaped safely.

To this day, warthogs always run with their tails lifted up to see that everyone is safe.

------------------------------------------------------------



"I have a very big problem," cried Chief Short and Round in a loud voice. "Everyone, come here! I have a very big problem."

The people of the Village of Many Shapes formed a big circle around Chief Short and Round. They wanted to hear what he had to say.

Chief Short and Round began, "This is the worst news ever. I have lost my spring horn."

The villagers whispered to each other, "Oh no!"

Chief Short and Round continued talking, "If I don't find my spring horn then I can't blow my spring horn! And we can't start the springtime party if I can't blow my spring horn. And spring won't come if we don't have a springtime party."

Little Square Jojo stepped into the circle and lifted up his hand. "I will find your spring horn, Chief Short and Round."

"Good, good," said the chief with a smile. "You can start looking at the last place I visited this morning. Go to Tata Rectangle's house. I remember having my horn with me there."

Tata Rectangle was happy to see Jojo. He opened his door and welcomed Jojo inside. "I remember seeing Chief Short and Round earlier this morning," said Tata Rectangle, "but I don't think he had his spring horn with him."

Little Square Jojo looked under Tata Rectangle's bed and behind his books. He even looked into his fridge. But Jojo couldn't find the spring horn anywhere.

"Go and see if Mama Triangle has the spring horn," said Tata Rectangle. "Chief Short and Round visited her before he came to see me."

"Thank you, Tata," said Jojo as he waved goodbye. Mama Triangle's house is about three kilometres from here, thought Jojo. That is a far distance to walk. I will stop at my house along the way and have a rest.

Little Square Jojo was hot and tired by the time he reached his house. He went inside to open his freezer and pour a glass of cold water with ice blocks. "I must be half the way to Mama Triangle's house," he said. "I hope she has the chief's horn."

Then Jojo had an idea. "I can visit Dudu Diamond. Her house is only half a kilometre from here and it's on the way."

Dudu Diamond was cleaning her house when Jojo arrived. Her earrings were making a lovely tinkling sound as she worked. "Hello, Jojo," she said. "What are you doing today?"

"I am on my way to Mama Triangle's house to find the chief's spring horn," said Little Square Jojo.

"That's nice of you," said Dudu. "I am happy to come with you. How much further do you have to go?"

Little Square Jojo scratched his head. "Let's see. Mama Triangle's house was three kilometres away from where I started. I walked about half the way to get to my house, that's one and a half kilometres. Then I walked another half a kilometre to get to your house. That makes 2 kilometres. So we only have one more kilometre to go!"

"That's not so far then!" smiled Dudu. "I'll pack some things to take with."

Dudu Diamond and Little Square Jojo walked until they reached the bottom of a tall mountain.

"Mama Triangle's house is right up there at the top," said Dudu. "Let's stop for a while and have a rest. You can have the sandwich I packed."

Jojo cut the sandwich into four smaller pieces. "Here,  let's share the sandwich, you have two pieces and I'll have two."

Soon Dudu Diamond and Little Square Jojo were half the way up the mountain. Things were very different there.

"Look," said Jojo. "That's the strangest spider I've ever seen."

"Wow," said Dudu. "It has spun a beautiful web. Let's count the sides. One, two, three, four, five and six! That makes it a hexagon then!"

After climbing over a very big rock, Little Square Jojo and Dudu Diamond finally arrived at Mama Triangle's house. They were high up now and felt a bit dizzy.

"Hello, you two," said Mama Triangle with a smile. "I am so happy to have visitors. Most of the time I'm all alone here on the top of my mountain. Come inside and sit down at my table."

"Mama Triangle," said Jojo after catching his breath,  "We've come to find Chief Short and Round's spring horn. Tata Rectangle said that the chief visited you this morning."

"Yes, that is correct," said Mama Triangle. "The chief came to ask me to help prepare for the springtime party. But he didn't leave his spring horn here."

"Oh no," said Jojo sadly. "We've come all this way for nothing!"

Mama Triangle held Jojo's hand as she led him outside. "Don't worry Jojo," she said. "Chief Short and Round didn't leave his spring horn here but I know where it is. That chief can be such a silly thing!"

Mama Triangle, Little Square Jojo and Dudu Diamond all ran down the mountain and in no time at all they were safely at the bottom.

It was evening by the time they reached Chief Short and Round's house. Mama Triangle knocked on the door and when it was opened everyone rushed inside.

"Hello," said Chief Short and Round, blinking sleepily. "Did you find my spring horn? Will we be able to have the springtime party?"

Little Square Jojo felt very bad and shook his head.

"Jojo looked for your spring horn all day," said Mama Triangle. "It is not his fault that he didn't find it. It is your fault, Chief Short and Round. Don't you remember?" Mama Triangle pointed at the chief. "You are wearing your spring horn on your head!"

Chief Short and Round gasped, "Oh my, I remember it now. I was so hot from climbing up that mountain that I put my horn on my head."

"I am so embarrassed," said Chief Short and Round as he took his spring horn off his head. Then he passed it to Little Square Jojo. "You have done all the hard work, Jojo. You should blow the horn."

Little Square Jojo smiled. He lifted up the horn and gave it a loud blow. "Now we can have the springtime party!" 

All was well in the Village of Many Shapes.

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago, in the village of Nyamani, there lived a man known as Kiundu. 

Kiundu liked to eat very much. He especially liked to eat meat.

One day, the chief of the village invited all the villagers to his son's wedding.

Then Kiundu heard people talking about another wedding party. It was in a nearby village called Katumbi.

"Two parties on the same day!" Kiundu thought.

"I must attend both parties," Kiundu said to himself. "I will first walk to Katumbi and then come back to Nyamani."

Kiundu woke up early in the morning and walked to Katumbi village. When he arrived he saw that the cooks were still preparing the food.

"I will go back to Nyamani and return here later," Kiundu decided.

Kiundu walked back to Nyamani hoping to find the meat ready. He was now hungry.

But when he arrived, people there were also still preparing the food.

"When I left Katumbi they were starting to cook," he thought. "The food must be ready now."

So Kiundu walked back to Katumbi. He was now very hungry.

By the time Kiundu got to Katumbi, people had already eaten. Guests were giving presents to the bride and the groom.

Kiundu did not have a gift to give. He only wanted to eat.

Kiundu was most disappointed about missing the food. He decided to walk back to Nyamani village.

He was hungry and tired and walked very slowly.

When he arrived at Nyamani village, people were singing and dancing.

They had already eaten all the food!

When he heard that there was no food, Kiundu fainted. He had missed meat from both parties.

When he recovered, he got some porridge in a small cup!

Kiundu walked home again, still hungry.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a rural area named Foxville, there lived a little girl called Sibo. 

Sibo stayed with her sick mom and didn't have friends.

She had an angelic voice. Birds responded to her singing.

Sibo woke up early each morning and sang with the birds in the back yard.

The dog would try to sing along with them.

Sibo sang for her mom on happy and sad days.

One morning Sibo woke up and her mom had fallen out of bed. She was very sick. 

Sibo ran outside calling to the neighbour for help.

But Mrs Tseko ignored her and went inside.

Sibo ran across the street and shouted, "Mr Sithole, please help, my mom is very sick!"

"Go away, I'm busy," said Mr Sithole.

Sibo kept on running until she came to the tree at the end of the village. She could hear a bird singing a familiar tune.  

When Sibo stood under the tree, the singing became louder and clearer.

Sibo began to sing along with the bird.

A sweet voice came from the tree saying, "Sibo, don't worry you're never alone."

The bird flew down from the tree and landed on Sibo's shoulder. 

She had never seen such a beautiful bird before. Its feathers shone and sparkled. She asked the bird, "Who are you?"

Sibo added, "Why are you singing my song?" 

The bird replied, "I am a friend, I can help you. Pull out one feather from my wing and make a wish. 

Sibo gently pulled out a feather, closed her eyes and wished.

Sibo said, "I wish people would help us."

When she opened her eyes, she saw a beautiful rainbow and sparkles from the wondrous bird. 

The bird said, "Go home, all is well."

Sibo ran home in excitement.

She found Mr Sithole and Mrs Tseko in her yard.

"We are looking after your mother," said Mrs Tseko with a smile. 

"Come next door and eat with my family," added Mrs Tseko.

Sibo happily joined the Tseko family. 

The magic bird flew over and they all sang together. 

It turned out to be a good day!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there were five foolish men living together. They shared everything. 

One day, they ran out of food. They called a meeting. "Where will our next meal come from?" one of them asked.

There was no easy answer to this question because they had no money and no friends in the community.

After thinking for a few seconds, one of them said "Let's get going!" The second person asked, "Where?"

The third person said, "To steal food." The fourth one said, "Won't we get caught?" The fifth person said, "Don't worry about that!"

The five men went to the market to steal something to eat.

As soon as they started stealing, they were caught!

The five men were taken to the police station.

During the investigation, the police asked, "Whose idea was it to steal food?" 

The men started whispering among themselves. Then they told the police how it happened.

The first person said, "I only suggested leaving, not stealing." The second person said, "I was curious about where we were going."

The third person said, "We all agreed to look for food."

The fourth person said, "I warned all of us that we're going to be caught."

And the fifth person said, "We all know we are thieves, and that's why I said, 'Don't worry about it'."

After hearing this, the police understood that all five men were involved in theft. 

The police officer concluded, "It is a good idea to share everything, except bad ideas!"

------------------------------------------------------------



























------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Magezi and Kasiira lived by sharing food.

Magezi said, "Let us dig together the way we eat together."

Magezi told Kasiira, "You dig and I will plant."

Magezi told Kasiira, "You plant and I will weed."

When the millet was ripe, Kasiira asked Magezi to harvest it.

Magezi said, "You harvest, I will put it in the granary."

Magezi was lazy.

So Kasiira gave him only one millet finger.

Magezi took the finger of millet.

He met Hen.

Hen ate all the millet. 

She gave Magezi an egg.

Magezi met some children. 

They broke the egg.

The children gave Magezi a mango.

Magezi met Parrot.

Parrot ate the mango and gave a feather.

The lake took the feather, and gave Magezi some water.

Magezi used the water to put out the charcoal burners' fire.

The charcoal burners gave Magezi an axe.

Magezi met some butchers. 

They broke the axe.

Magezi got the bull's head and tail.

Look what Magezi did!

Then he shouted, "The king's bull is stuck in the mud!"

People came to help. 

"Pull the tail and head," said Magezi.

Magezi told the people, "Give me your cattle for the king."

They did.

------------------------------------------------------------



Have you been to Cape Town? 

This is a view of Cape Town from up on the mountain.

There are mountains around the city of Cape Town. 

Trees and plants live on the mountains.

Do you see the fire starting on the mountain? 

It starts with a tree and spreads through the trees.

Once the fire starts it is very difficult to stop, and can spread quickly.

The raging fire burns the grass. 

The fire licks at the tree roots and the smoke blows between their leaves.

After the fire has gone out, the land looks dry and burnt. 

Nothing looks alive.

But when the rains come, green leaves will spring up from the burnt grass and trees. 

There is life after all!

Fires can be very dangerous if they spread out of control. 

Always extinguish a fire if you light one.

------------------------------------------------------------



Cow, Goat, and Dog went to town in a taxi. 

They were going shopping.

Cow bought a TV.

Goat bought a blanket.

Dog wanted to buy new shoes. 

But he did not have enough money.

The three friends went home in a taxi.

Did you see Cow standing in a field doing nothing? 

It is because she is thinking about her TV.

Did you see Goat running away from cars? 

It is because he is worried that someone might steal his blanket.

Did you see Dog running towards cars? 

Now he has enough money to buy his shoes. He wants to go to town.

------------------------------------------------------------



Knock, knock! 

There is a loud rap on the front door.

Alake is very excited. 

"Who is there?" she asks.

"Mummy, we have a visitor!"

"Okay," her mum replies. "That would be Mrs Hassan. Please open the door for her."

Alake opens the door with a smile. "Welcome ma, please come in. My mother will be with you soon."

Mrs Hassan grins back at Alake.

"Can I get you anything to drink?" asks Alake.

"I am fine, dear Alake, thank you," responds Mrs Hassan.

"Good day, Mrs Hassan," says Alake's mum. "Sorry I kept you waiting."

"No problem my friend, Alake looked after me."

Alake's mum beams a smile. 

"Yes, Alake is a perfect little hostess and I am so proud of her," she says to Mrs Hassan.



------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was no night in Opio's village.

People slept when they were tired and worked when they were awake.

One day, Opio went out hunting with his dogs. After a short time, his dogs started to chase an antelope. 

Opio followed them. He ran for many hours. Every time he became tired, he rested. Then he would run again. But he could not find his dogs.

After many days, he came to a village. He went to one of the houses and said to the owner, "I have chased an antelope for a long time and I am very tired. I want to rest."

The man said, "Sit down and rest. Would you like some beer?" Opio was very thirsty so he drank some. Then he went to sleep.

When he woke up, he couldn't see. He opened and closed his eyes many times. "You have given me something very bad to drink," he said to the man. "I can't see properly anymore!"

"There is nothing wrong with you," the man replied. "It's night now. Haven't you ever seen night? When the day leaves, the night comes."

Opio asked many questions about the night. He began to like it very much. He and his new friend talked until morning.

He stayed for another day so that he could see the night come again.

The next morning he asked his friend, "How can I take the night to my own village? I want my people to see the night."

The man explained, "When it starts to get dark this evening, walk to your village. If you look straight in front, the night will follow you. If you look back, the night will go away."

Opio did as he was told. That evening, he began to walk towards his village.

He felt the dark night behind him as he walked. He was tempted to look back, but he did not.

When he came to his village, the villagers were afraid. They asked Opio, "What disease have you brought to us? What is this dark thing following you?"

Opio said, "My friends, this dark thing is called night. You are afraid and I was afraid, too."

Opio continued to explain, "You will learn to like the night. When the light comes we can work and when night comes, we can rest."

And that is how night came to Opio's village.

------------------------------------------------------------



Neymar arrived in the capital city of Nigeria. 

The Nigerians told him to demonstrate the skill of passing the ball using the instep.

From Nigeria,  Neymar moved to Ghana. 

He demonstrated passing the ball using the inside of his foot. 

This made the people in Ghana very happy.

While in Ghana,  Neymar received an invitation from South Africa.

He went to South Africa to demonstrate trapping the ball using the front of the foot.

From South Africa,  he moved to Chad. 

In Chad, he demonstrated trapping the ball using the side of the foot.

When Neymar reached DR Congo, he shook the country with his skill trapping the ball using his thigh.

The Ugandans who watched Neymar in the Congo  invited him to demonstrate the skill of tackling.

This news then spread across East Africa. 

The Kenyans welcomed Neymar to demonstrate punching in goal keeping.

The same week, the Tanzanians called for Neymar to demonstrate the skill of heading in passing the ball.

Neymar moved to Rwanda to demonstrate the skill of passing the ball using the outside of the foot.

After Rwanda,  Neymar concluded his African trip in South Sudan. 

He demonstrated the skill of punting in goal keeping.

------------------------------------------------------------



Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.

Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.

"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.

Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.

"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.

"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.

Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.

It was a pillow and it weighed very little.

Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.

It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.

The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.

Lynne's cake was burnt.

Lynne was very sad.

Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.

"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.

Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."

------------------------------------------------------------



One day,  Manu was walking.

At that time,  a lion was resting in the grass.

Manu was full of fear.

The lion woke up.

Manu climbed a tall tree.

The lion waited for Manu under the tree.

Manu fell asleep.

He fell down from the tree.

The lion ran away.

Manu started to run in the same direction as the lion.

When he realised,  he changed and run away.

------------------------------------------------------------



Baboon and Crocodile were the best of friends. 

They played together. They ate together. They did everything together.

But one day,  Crocodile got very sick. He was close to dying. 

Crocodile went to the nyabezi. "If you want to get better,  you have to eat baboon meat," said the nyabenzi.

When he heard this, Crocodile cried. 

If he wanted to get better, he had no choice than to eat his friend the baboon.

When Baboon went to see his friend, he got on Crocodile's back. 

Crocodile took Baboon out to the deepest part of the river.

"What is troubling you, my friend?" asked Baboon.

Crocodile said, "The nyabezi told me that if I want to get better I must eat you, my friend."

Baboon replied,  "No, don't eat me. I'm too small!

Wait a minute and I'll call my grandfather. He's bigger than me. Eat him and you'll be full."

Crocodile said,  "Where is this grandfather of yours?"

Baboon replied,  "He's in the tree on that island." 

Crocodile said,  "Go and get him so that I may eat him."

Baboon jumped off Crocodile's back and ran straight up the tree. 

Crocodile waited and waited. But Baboon did not return. 

And that was the end of their friendship.

------------------------------------------------------------



A zoo is a place where wild animals are kept for the public to see them.

Some of the animals are kept in cages so that they do not escape from the zoo or harm visitors.

El and Ama have always been talking about the zoo. One day, they decided to visit it. 

They were met by a guide who took them around to see the animals.

They saw many animals they had only heard about.

They saw monkeys. It was exciting to watch the monkeys eating bananas.

They saw giraffes with long necks. 

The giraffes were the tallest animals at the zoo.

For the first time, El and Ama heard a lion roar.

It was very frightening.

The crocodile opened its mouth when it saw them.

It has big teeth.

They saw zebras with black and white stripes. 

This reminded them of the zebra crossing in front of their school.

El and Ama saw an elephant with a long trunk.

The parrots were a delight to watch.

El and Ama were amazed when they heard a parrot mention their names.

All too soon, it was time to leave the zoo.

El and Ama thanked the tour guide and left for their home.

------------------------------------------------------------



This story starts in the old times when animals and people lived together. 

In those days people did not have the right to fire. They ate their food raw. Only Lion had the power of fire.

The people and the animals came together to make a plan. "What can we do to get the fire from Lion so that we can cook our food?" they asked. 

They decided to wait until evening and started singing and singing, clapping and clapping, calling everyone together. "Come dance with us. Come dance with us. Come dance with us."

Many animals came from the bush to join in the dancing and singing. Lion brought his fire sticks. He rubbed the sticks, rubbed and rubbed. Soon a little smoke appeared beneath the sticks. 

Lion blew on the smoke and added some dry grass. A little flame appeared and everyone brought a piece of wood. Soon everyone was dancing around a fire.

Rabbit was a cunning and fast animal. The people said to him, "While we are singing here and while Lion is dancing with us, you must take his fire sticks and run." 

So Rabbit grabbed Lion's fire sticks and ran. He did not make it because Lion caught up with him and brought the fire sticks back.

The lion sang a boastful song:

To me it does not matter. 
I don't have a problem. 
I can eat you with hair.  
I can eat you without hair. 
I don't have a problem. 
All of you are food to me.

Springbok could run and jump very fast. 

The people said to him, "While Lion is dancing and singing here with us,  you must grab his fire sticks and run."

When they were dancing and singing, Springbok grabbed the fire sticks and jumped away into the veld. 

But Lion said, "Why do I not hear the clippety-clop clippety-clop of Springbok's hooves behind me?"

Lion turned and saw Springbok running into the veld with his fire sticks. So he ran after Springbok, caught him and came back with his fire sticks. 

Again, Lion sang his boastful song.

Then the people whispered to each other. They said,  "Let us ask Duiker. He is small and very fast." 

"Duiker, while Lion is dancing and singing here with us, you must grab his fire sticks and run away," they said.

When they were dancing around the fire, Duiker grabbed Lion's fire sticks and ran into the veld. But Lion said, "Why do I not hear Duiker snort-snorting behind me as before?" 

He turned around and chased after little Duiker who was leaping into the veld. Lion caught up with him and returned to the fire with his sticks.

Again, Lion sang his boastful song: 

To me it does not matter. 
I don't have a problem. 
I can eat you with hair.  
I can eat you without hair. 
I don't have a problem. 
All of you are food to me.

"Oh," sighed the people, "Which animal can help us now? Ostrich has the longest legs of all, let us ask him." 

They explained the plan to Ostrich and he grabbed Lion's fire sticks this time.

Lion said, "Why do I not hear Ostrich's high singing voice behind me anymore?" 

He looked around, saw Ostrich and chased after him.

After a long time, Lion returned with a tired face, for Ostrich ran too fast for him. 

Lion said, "From this day on, I will not leave any of you alone. I will hunt you and chase you and eat you!" 

And this is how Lion came to be everyone's enemy and how people got the power of fire.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Lion and Elephant were best friends. 

They lived in the jungle in two separate houses. They were friends no matter what.

Elephant looked troubled so he said to Lion, "I have a bully, his name is Hyena." "Where is he?" Lion asked.

Elephant replied, "In the forest." "Let's go to the forest then," said Lion, already stepping forward to help his friend.

When they arrived at Hyena's place, Hyena ran to meet them, saying, "Who are you? And what are you doing in my territory?"

"I have come to warn you, Hyena, to stop bullying Elephant," Lion said. "Never!" Hyena replied.

The Lion gave an angry roar!

Roaaaarrrr!!!!!! Came the angry sound from Lion. Hyena started to shiver. "Okay, I will not bully him again, but please leave me alone," cried Hyena. 

Elephant thanked Lion for stopping Hyena from bullying him.

Lion and Elephant were friends because they were able to tolerate each other.

Though they are different they loved to do things together and shared whatever they had with each other.

One day, Elephant built a mansion for himself and Lion to live in. When Lion saw the house, he was  happy because the house was big and beautiful. 

Lion thanked Elephant for their friendship and promised to cherish it.

"To celebrate our new home, I will hunt and bring back the finest meal for us to share tonight," said Lion.

Whenever anyone asked Lion what he treasured the most, he would say, "It's not the house itself, but the friend who built it with me in mind."

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a spider called Anansi. Anansi was too lazy to cook his own food. 

Instead, he used to visit his friends and eat the delicious food they had cooked.

One day, Anansi was passing Rabbit's house when he smelled green vegetables cooking. He was very excited. 

Rabbit said to Anansi, "They're not quite ready yet. You can help me to wash up while we wait." 

Anansi replied, "Sorry, I have things to do. I'll come back later."

"How will I call you when they're ready?" asked Rabbit. Anansi thought for a minute. "I'll spin a web," he said. 

"I'll tie one end around my leg and one end to your pot. When the greens are ready, pull on the web string. I'll come right away." 

So Anansi tied the web to the pot, and walked on.

Anansi saw Monkey and his wife, cooking beans in a large pot. "Come and join us! The beans are nearly ready." Monkey said. 

Anansi replied, "Sorry, I have things to do. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the beans are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come."

As Anansi walked by Warthog's house, he smelled sweet potatoes. Warthog told Anansi, "My pot is full of sweet potatoes and honey! Come and share my food with me. Take this fork and help me to stir it." 

Anansi replied, "I'll come back later. Let me tie one end of this web around my leg and one end to your pot. When the sweet potatoes are ready, pull on the web string, and I'll come."

By the time Anansi arrived at the river, each of his eight legs was tied to a pot of delicious food. 

Then, Anansi felt a pull on one of his legs. "Rabbit's food is ready!" Anansi thought, licking his lips.

He felt a second pull. And a third. And a fourth, fifth,  sixth, seventh, eighth pull. 

Everyone was pulling on the web strings at the same time! "Stop! Stop!" he cried in pain, as his legs were stretched thinner and thinner. But no one could hear him.

Finally, the web strings could hold no longer. They snapped, one by one. Anansi rolled into the river to soothe his painful legs. 

But his legs would not return to their normal shape. Anansi was too embarrassed to go to any of his friends that day.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there lived a woman. 

She always wanted a child.

The woman took the best clay soil she could find. 

She started to make a girl.

The girl who was made of mud became a real human girl. 

The woman named the girl Akatope.

The woman was very happy. 

She loved Akatope very much.

Akatope was warned by her mother not to go out of the hut. 

She did not listen. Whenever her mother was not home, Akatope ran out to play with other children.

One day, Akatope was out playing with the other children. 

It began to rain hard.

The other children ran to their huts. 

As Akatope ran, her legs started to dissolve. She hunched over and sat down between bushes.

The other children told their parents what had happened to Akatope. 

They were very sad and shocked.

When the woman heard what had happened to Akatope, she cried for many days. 

The villagers took an orphan girl to take the place of Akatope.

But that was not necessary. 

A big surprise awaited the woman!

One night, there was a gentle knock on the door.

"Who could that be," the woman wondered.

Akatope had come home. 

She was tired and sick.

Akatope's mother sold everything she owned. She used the money to treat Akatope. 

Akatope grew up to be the most beautiful girl in the village.

------------------------------------------------------------



Look at the animals we keep at home.

The cow gives us milk.

The rabbits and cats are very friendly to human beings.

The horse says,  "Neigh."

Cows and goats are paid as bride price in Uganda.

The chicken says,  "Cluck."

The dog is a source of security at our homes.

The farmer looks after all these animals.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a crocodile living at a river with her young ones.

The crocodile taught her young ones not to trust humans. 

This is because humans have brains.

One day a certain man crossed the river.

The man met the crocodile in the middle of the river and she attacked him.

Just as the crocodile was about to kill him, she remembered her father's words. 

He always told her that people have brains.

The man promised the crocodile that he could bring her human brains. 

So the crocodile released him.

The crocodile and her young ones are still waiting on the riverbank to receive those brains.

Crocodiles are angry to this day because they never received the brains that were promised to them.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Cat.

This is Dog.

Cat and Dog open the door. They open the door of their house.

Cat and Dog leave their house.

Cat and Dog walk. 

They walk on the grass. They walk between the trees. They walk through the bush.

Then they stop.

Cat and Dog see a sign. They see a sign on a tree.

Cat and Dog look at the sign. They look at the words on the sign.

Cat and Dog read. 

They read the sign, 'look out for the cape.'

Cat says, "What is a cape?"

Dog says, "A cape is a jacket."

Cat and Dog can not see a cape.

Then they laugh. 

They laugh at the sign. 

They laugh at the silly sign.

But then the words change!

Cat and Dog read. 

They read the sign.

'Look out for the grape.'

Cat says, "What is a grape?"

Dog says, "A grape is a fruit."

Cat and Dog can not see a grape.

Then they laugh.

They laugh at the sign.

They laugh at the silly sign.

Cat and Dog look at the sign. They see worms on the sign. The worms change the words!

Cat and Dog take the worms. They take the worms and they throw away the worms.

Cat and Dog read.

They read the sign, 'look out for the ape.'

Cat says, "What is an ape?"

Dog says, "An ape is a big monkey."

Cat and Dog see the ape. Cat and Dog point at the ape.

The ape is big. The ape is very big.

Cat says, "Run!" Dog says, "Run!"

Cat and Dog run away. They run away.

Cat and Dog run back to their house. 

Cat and Dog close the door.

They close the door of their house.

Bye bye Cat.

Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye ape.

Bye bye worms.



------------------------------------------------------------



My name is Iember.

I am the boss of my body! 

Covered or seen, my body parts are all mine.

If someone touches me and it's not okay, I shout:

"NO! DON'T TOUCH ME!" 

I run away and tell a grown-up I can trust.

Bad touching makes me feel scared, embarrassed, and uncomfortable.  

I tell on anyone who makes me feel that way.

My body belongs to me. 

Every part of my body is mine.

Good touching makes me feel safe, happy, and comfortable.

No one can touch my body unless I say it is okay.

No one can touch my private parts.

No one can take photos of my private parts.

And I do not want to see photos of anyone else's private parts!

I tell my family about anyone who asks me to keep a secret.

I tell someone I trust about anyone who makes me feel uncomfortable.

My name is Iember. 

I am the boss of my body and you are the boss of your body!

------------------------------------------------------------



Luwo went to church with his mother. 

She was holding his hand on the path.

Inside the church there were many people gathered. 

They were singing.

Luwo left the church. 

His mother didn't see him.

Luwo stood in the path. 

He looked down the path, and thought, "Where is my house?"

So, he followed the path. He saw a big house. 

"No, that's not our house. Our house is small."

Luwo walked a bit more. He saw a house on stilts. 

"No, that's not our house. Our house is not on stilts."

He kept on walking. He saw a small house of straw. 

"No, that's not our house. Our house has mud walls."

Luwo went farther. He saw a small house with a tree outside. 

"No, that's not our house. Our house has two trees outside."

At last Luwo saw his mother coming toward him. Luwo ran to her. 

His mother said, "Let's go home!"

Which house is Luwo's house?

------------------------------------------------------------



Luntha loves bananas. 

Sadly, there are no bananas at the local market.

A big truck takes all the bananas to the city.

One day, Luntha asked his father, "Can we grow our own bananas?" 

Luntha's father replied, "That is a great idea!"

They quickly went to see a local farmer.

They bought twenty suckers to start their own garden. Luntha watered the banana plants every day.

Three months later, the bananas developed broad leaves.

After nine months, the bananas started flowering.

They produced big flower buds.

In the tenth month, the banana fingers grew bigger.

The bananas were fully mature by the twelfth month.

Luntha and his dad harvested three plants.

"Dad, we cannot eat all these bananas," said Luntha.

They refused to sell the bananas to the big truck.

They took the extra bananas to the market. 

They made a lot of money selling bananas.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a man who had two wives. 

The wives gave birth to two daughters, Adie and Adhoch. 

The step sisters loved each other very much.

Adie was hard working, neat, kind and well behaved. 

Adhoch, on the other hand, was lazy, unkind and untidy.

Teachers loved Adie. She got many presents for her hard work. 

Adhoch did not receive any. Her mother was jealous of Adie.

Adie's mother became sick and died. 

Adie's stepmother did not love her as her mother did.

Adhoch's mother made Adie do all the work. She did not have time to get ready for school. 

Adhoch studied and played when Adie was busy working.

Adie still did well in school. She passed her exams and received more presents. 

This made Adhoch's mother very angry.

One day, Adhoch's mother went with Adie to the river to fetch water. Adhoch's mother told Adie to go deeper into the river to fetch clean water. 

Adie was swept to the opposite side of the river.

Mother went back home. Adhoch asked where her sister was. 

Her mother said, "Adie is at the river with her friends. She will come home later."

When night fell, Adhoch went to look for her step sister at the river. She called her name, "Adie! Where are you?" 

Adhoch heard, "I am on the other side of the river. Mother abandoned me."

Adhoch walked across the river calling her sister. "Adie! Where are you?" 

She heard the same reply, "I am on the other side of the river. Mother abandoned me."

Adhoch got deep into the river. 

She was swept across to the other side in the same way as Adie.

Adhoch's mother was sad. She lost Adhoch because she was jealous of Adie. 

She had to do all the work by herself.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once there was a girl called Linda. She lived with her two sisters, brother and mother. 

She was a very happy and active girl.

She had a best friend called Stacy. 

They trusted each other and always shared their secrets.

Every Tuesday, Linda and Stacy would go to the movies because free popcorn was served.

After watching a movie, they would go to the park and listen to music.

They would enjoy ice-creams.

This was Linda's happy day. 

Watching a good movie, with free popcorn.

Then music and ice-cream at the park with Stacy.

Happy moments do not last forever. 

Learn to cherish your happy moments…

…and the people you share those moments with.

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago, in the village of Mkosi, there lived a greedy Hyena.

In a nearby village, lived a timid Tortoise. Hyena and Tortoise were friends.

Hyena heard that across the great western river lived bees that made delicious honey.

These bees traveled once a year, and were away from their hives for a whole week. 

"We must get that honey while the bees are away," said Hyena to Tortoise.

Tortoise was afraid to go. But he was too timid to refuse. 

The next morning, the two animals set off for the beehives. Hyena walked very fast but Tortoise dragged behind in fear.

They went up a hill, down into a valley and across the plains. 

Then they crossed the great western river, and walked further.

Finally, they saw beehives in trees on a hill. Hyena ran to the trees energetically. 

Tortoise almost fainted because he was so tired and hungry.

When Hyena reached the biggest beehive, he wasted no time. 

He called to Tortoise, "Quickly, climb up the tree and knock down the hive."

Tortoise struggled slowly up the tree. He knew he could easily slip and fall. 

This annoyed Hyena, who started yelling at Tortoise.

When Tortoise touched the beehive, he heard the buzzing of bees. They were still in their hives! 

Tortoise was startled and fell out of the tree. The big beehive fell too.

The beehive landed on Tortoise. Honey covered him completely so he was hidden! 

Hyena started to lick up the honey. The bees were not pleased.

The bees stung Hyena on every part of his body. 

Hyena decided to run for his life but the bees followed him.

Hyena ran down the hill, through the river, across the plains and into the valley. 

The bees swarmed around him all the way, stinging him.

Tortoise, still under the big beehive, noticed that everything was quiet. 

The beehive and honey had dried on his back.

Soon Tortoise realised that he no longer needed to crawl into a bush to hide. 

His hard new shell of honey could protect him.

Hyena was so tired and full of stings that he fainted before he got home. 

When he woke up, he discovered that the stings had caused patches in his fur.

This is how the tortoise got his hard shell, and the hyena got his patches. 

Hyena swore that he would never again steal. But the hyena and the tortoise are no longer friends.

------------------------------------------------------------













------------------------------------------------------------



Mondli and Mbali lived in the city with their father. They looked forward to the holidays. 

Not just because school was closed, but because they went to visit their grandmother. She lived in a village near a large lake.

Mondli and Mbali were excited because it was time to visit their grandmother again. The night before, they packed their bags and got ready for the long journey to her village. 

They could not sleep and talked the whole night about the holiday.

Early the next morning, they left for the village in their father's car. They drove past mountains, animals and farms. 

They counted cars and sang songs. After a while, the children were tired and fell asleep.

Father woke up Mondli and Mbali as they arrived in the village. 

They found Nobuntu, their grandmother, resting on a mat under a tree.

Nobuntu welcomed them into her house and danced around the room singing with joy. 

Her grandchildren were excited to give her the presents they brought from the city. "First open my gift," said Mondli. "No, my gift first!" said Mbali.

After she opened the presents, Nobuntu blessed her grandchildren. Then Mondli and Mbali went outside to play. 

Nobuntu and her son talked about the family and caught up with news.

When it was dark Mondli and Mbali returned to the house for dinner. Before they could finish eating, they were falling asleep! 

The next day, the children's father drove back to the city leaving them with Nobuntu.

Mondli and Mbali helped their grandmother with household chores. They fetched water and firewood. 

They collected eggs from the chickens and picked greens from the garden.

One morning, Mondli took his grandmother's cows to graze. They ran onto a neighbour's farm. 

The farmer was angry. He threatened to keep the cows for eating his crops. After that day, Mondli made sure that the cows did not get into trouble again.

On another day, the children went to the market place with Nobuntu. She had a stall selling vegetables, sugar and soap.

Mbali liked to tell customers the price of items. Mondli would pack the items that customers bought.

But the holidays were over too soon. The children had to go back to school in the city. 

Nobuntu gave Mondli a cap and Mbali a sweater. She packed food for their journey home.

When their father came to fetch them, they did not want to leave. The children begged Nobuntu to go with them to the city. 

She smiled and said, "I am too old for the city. But I will be waiting here for you to visit again next holiday."

------------------------------------------------------------



In the heart of Kwathu community, a big problem was growing like a weed.

Plastic litter was everywhere, making the town look messy and unattractive.

Mala was 11 years old. She was a girl with a kind heart. 

Mala didn't like the sight of the plastic litter. Every morning on her way to school, she would see the plastic waste and sigh.

One day, while chatting with her friends, Mala shared her frustration.

"We can't just sit and watch our town drown in plastic."

Her friends nodded in agreement, and together, they decided to act.

They grabbed their worn-out school bags and started picking up the plastic litter around town.

They cleaned the parks, the playgrounds, and the riverbanks.

Soon, their school bags were overflowing with plastic, and they had no place to put it.

"Why don't we make something out of all this plastic?" suggested Gani, one of Mala's friends.

"That's a great idea!" Mala exclaimed. "But what can we make?"

Their creative minds were buzzing. They thought and thought, until they had a fantastic idea.

They would make handmade plastic balls!

They would tie the plastic bags together and heat them up just a bit to create colourful, bouncy balls.

These balls could bring joy to children all over town.

Mala and her friends collected more plastic than ever before.

They spent days and nights crafting the plastic into magical balls of different sizes and colours.

Word spread and more children joined the effort. 
Soon, the town was cleaner than ever.

Mala and her friends had inspired their community to change.

------------------------------------------------------------



Imagine a day. When we could have a picnic on the shores of Lake Victoria.

Imagine a day. When everyone can read and there are books in every language.

Imagine a day. When I shall give birth to my first baby.

Imagine a day. When all people in the world live peacefully as brothers and sisters.

Imagine a day. When I can walk on water.

Imagine a day. When your daughter becomes a president.

Imagine a day. When you are about to be put in a grave and then you come back to life again!

Imagine a day. When people develop wings to fly,  and reach where their creator is.

Imagine a day. When all the ground is covered with a carpet across the whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mother and father left their baby with their older children.

The older children played and forgot about the baby.

One day, cranes came across the crying baby.

They lifted the baby in its blanket and flew away.

The mother saw four cranes flying away with her baby.

The cranes looked after the baby.

While the cranes were away, a frog swallowed the baby!

For three flies, the frog returned the baby to its parents.

------------------------------------------------------------



Years ago, a group of horned animals decided to have a big party high up in the mountains. 

They only invited other animals with horns. No one else.

When the pig heard about the party, he thought, "I don't have any horns. What am I going to do?"

The next day, he had an idea. He'd stick some horns to his head with wax!

It worked, and the pig felt very clever when he was allowed into the party. 

The problem was that the party was taking place close to the sun. 

When the party started heating up, the wax began to melt, and his horns fell off.

The horned animals were shocked. "Who's that one with no horns? Why did he come here?" they asked.

The king of the horned animals commanded, "Grab that pig and throw him down to earth." 

So all the animals, when they heard the king's words, did just that.

They grabbed the pig and threw him down to earth.

Poor pig! When he fell, he landed on his nose. And his nose was flattened into a snout.

Their job done, all the other animals returned to the party. 

They ate and danced all night. And the king was happy.

The pig's flat snout has been that way ever since.



------------------------------------------------------------



Mother was finishing packing her clothes in a small bag.

As she went out the door, she hugged me and said, "Bye for now."

I looked up at her and asked, "Where are you going, mum?"

I started to cry wanting to follow her but dad lifted me up on his shoulder.

Dad said, "Your mother is going to the hospital to have the baby."

When I heard "baby" I stopped crying and looked at him. 

"Why is she going to get the baby from the hospital?" I asked him.

Dad sat me on a small chair and said, "I will tell you why she is going to get the baby from the hospital."

I listened keenly to him as he explained. But, I didn't quite understand why she wasn't having the baby at home. 

When dad finished explaining, I asked, "Will she still love me when she comes back with the other baby?"

My dad held me close and said, "We will always love you."

"Can I write a letter to her while she is there?" I asked dad.

That evening, I began to write a letter to mum.

I tore a paper from my exercise book.

I began to write...

Mummy, mummy, dad said that you have gone to bring another baby.

Please, hurry up and return home.

I want you to bring a baby girl.

I want to play with her when she grows up.

You can bring two so one can be mine.

I am waiting for you here outside our house.

I folded my letter so I could give it to my father to bring it to mum. 

When I woke up the following morning, the letter was gone.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is me.

I live with my mom, brother and sister.

My mom likes to cook.

Sometimes my mom visits her friends.

When she is away, I clean the house and wash the dishes.

When it is night time, my mom tells us to pray.

When it is my birthday, my mom brings me something.

I love my mom.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there lived an old goat.

She had two kids.

She loved her kids very much.

She went to the forest to fetch grass for her kids.

While she was in the forest, a wolf ate her kids.

She came back and did not see her kids.

She cried bitterly.

Mother goat was never happy again.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a husband and wife with two daughters. They lived happily until one day the mother died. 

The man married again. His new wife did not get along with his daughters. 

The man was confused. He loved his daughters but he also loved his new wife.

In the end he decided to send away his daughters. He took them on a journey. 

When they reached a big tree, they sat under it to rest. He said to them, "My daughters wait for me here until I return."

While in the bush, the man cut off his finger nails. He said, "My nails, I am abandoning my daughters. When they call for me, respond to them."

The girls waited under the tree for their father, but he did not return.

They called, "Father! Father! Where are you?" A voice responded, "I am coming! I am coming!" It was the man's nails.

They searched in the direction of the voice, but could not find their father. Finally, they realised he was not coming back.

The two girls returned to the tree and prayed loudly, "Creator of this tree, hear us." 

The tree split into pieces and became a nice house. 

Again the girls prayed, "God of fruits, feed us." Fruit dropped from the sky for them to eat.

Rather than thinking about their father, the daughters chose to live their lives as best they could 

They stayed in the house and ate only the fruit which dropped from the sky. But after a while they wanted to eat meat.

The girls knew that Hyena lived near their home. He kept many animals and ate meat every day. 

Eventually, they decided to go and steal meat from Hyena. So the older girl went alone to Hyena's house.

Hyena was sitting at his fire but the girl did not see him. He caught her and tied her up. 

Hyena decided to boil her for supper. He put the girl into a pot with water and lit the fire, and then he went out.

After a while, the younger girl began to wonder why her sister had not returned. 

She went to Hyena's house and saw her sister in the pot on the fire.

She prayed, "God of pots, please don't let my sister die."

Immediately, the pot broke into pieces and the older sister fell out alive. 

The girls ran away before Hyena came back. When they arrived at their house they found many riches there.

Many years passed and the sisters grew to women.

One day, a man wearing old and dirty clothes knocked on the sisters' door, asking for help. 

When the older sister looked at him, she was reminded of their father. She asked the man his name and where he came from.

When he finished explaining, the women knew that this old man was their father. They told him their part of the story.

The man wept with joyful surprise. "Can you forgive me?" he asked. The sisters welcomed their father and invited him to stay. 

And in time, they forgave him.

------------------------------------------------------------



Wamaitha and her grandchildren sat outside her house. The children were excited because they really enjoyed listening to their grandmother's stories. 

Wamaitha began: 

Long, long ago. She paused and looked at her grandchildren's faces glow with curiosity.

Wamaitha continued to tell this story:
 
Beyond the hills and valleys, was a place called Mongu. For years, people from neighbouring Kitwe occupied Mongu. The people in Mongu were forced to work for long hours with little pay. 

All that they produced was taken to Kitwe. The little that remained was sold back to Mongu people at high prices.

One day, the people of Mongu held a meeting. They had decided that enough was enough. They wanted their land back from Kitwe. They discussed the odds of winning. They knew that Kitwe had a strong army and better weapons.

There were many ideas, but even after a long time they had no solution. Just as they were about to give up, a young man stood up and said, "I think I know a way."

They were all curious and asked, "Tell us!"

The young man began, "My grandfather told us about a man named Ubuntu who lives across the forest. He grows a fruit called uhuru which gives people the strength to do anything. Let me find this man."

They were all silent and did not know what to do. Since no one else had a better idea, they said, "You go and find this Ubuntu."

The young man set out to find Ubuntu. After five days of going through the forest he came out to find the house. He was very happy. He found Ubuntu, who asked, "What do you want?"

The young man answered, "I want uhuru." As he said that, the other man's eyes grew bigger with surprise. It was so long since anyone had gone in search of the uhuru fruit.

They talked for a long time. Ubuntu decided to give the young man the fruit. He said, "Listen carefully. Once you eat this fruit you will acquire wisdom which will help your people to win independence. You will be the leader of Mongu. Rule with humility."

He gave the young man a small round fruit and added, "Follow my instructions and your land will prosper. Now, go, and tell no one about me.''

The young man went back to Mongu. Just as Ubuntu had said, they were able to chase away the people of Kitwe and get back their land. A celebration was held.

The young man was praised for his courage. He became the first leader of independent Mongu. This man was wise and governed his people well. He served them with humility and considered them in every action he took.

Wamaitha said, "My dear grandchildren, the fruit of freedom comes to each one of us at a given point. Be wise enough to use it well. Remember your actions do not only affect you but everyone around you."

The happy grandchildren went into the house. Wamaitha sat back and watched them go. She hoped the stories she told them would build them into better people and leaders for tomorrow.

------------------------------------------------------------



It was a very hot Saturday afternoon in December.

"Bontle and Mpho and Lerato, go out and play!" Mme said to us. "I don't want you under my feet." 

We ran out of the house.

"Let's go to the river," Lerato said. "It's cooler there." 

"But Mme told us not to swim in the river," said Bontle. 

"We won't swim," answered Lerato. "We'll just play in the shade next to the water."

But playing libeke is hot work, even when you're under the trees next to the river. 

First we took off our shoes. But we were still hot. Then we took off our shirts and skirts. But we were still hot.

We put our feet in the river to cool off. Then we splashed each other. 

Soon we were soaked with water.

"Oh come on! Let's swim," said Mpho. "Mme will never know." 

We swam and swam and forgot about the time.

The sun started to go down, and the day began to cool. 

Where were our clothes?

We looked under the trees. We looked on the bushes. 

We looked everywhere.

There were some cows near the river, enjoying the sweet grass. Bontle looked up, "Look at that cow! What's in her mouth?" 

"She's eating a red flower," said Lerato. 

"It's not a red flower," shouted Mpho. "It's your shirt!"

We looked at another cow who was chewing something blue. 

"That's my skirt!" shouted Bontle.

We went home in our panties, shivering. But not only because it was cool. 

"It was the cows," we cried. "The cows ate our clothes."

But did Mme believe us? 

Soon our bottoms were very warm. And it wasn't from the sun.

------------------------------------------------------------



Here is a jug of lemon juice.

It is cold and sweet.

There are 8 of us. 
How can we share the juice so that each one gets the same amount?

We can measure 8 equal parts on the jug.

We can use a piece of string to measure.

Cut the string to the same length as the height of the juice in the jug.

Fold the string into 8 equal parts.

Mark the equal parts on the jug.

Then we are ready to pour 8 equal amounts of juice.

We share the lemon juice.

When it is finished, we want to drink more!

How do you make lemon juice?

Lemon juice

water – 7 cups
sugar – 2 cups
juice from lemons – 1 cup

You will need to squeeze about 7 ripe lemons. Use a big jug or 2 litre bottle to mix ingredients.

Method

1. Mix sugar and lemon juice with 2 cups of cold water. 
2. Stir the jug, or shake the bottle, until sugar is dissolved.
3. Mix in 5 cups of cold water.

Here is another way to write the recipe:

1/10 juice of lemon
2/10 sugar
7/10 water

The pure lemon juice is one part of the total amount of juice. How many parts is the total amount?

The picture shows half a lemon.

How many parts in half a lemon?

How many parts in a whole lemon?

Each part is a fraction of the whole lemon.

------------------------------------------------------------



Leopard was always trying to catch Antelope.

And Antelope was always escaping from Leopard.

One day, Leopard called out to Antelope, "Let's be friends. What you eat, I don't eat. Nothing makes us enemies."

Antelope agreed.

So Leopard said, "Let's make an oath to be friends. If either of us breaks the oath, her child will die."

They made an oath to be friends.

At night, Antelope slept under a tree. Leopard slept in the branches above.

Antelope soon became fat. Leopard became thin.

Leopard was tempted to eat fat Antelope.

She said to herself, "I don't care about the oath. I don't even have a child!"

Leopard jumped down to catch Antelope. But she got caught between two branches.

Antelope was shocked. She leaped up and cried, "Beh! Beh!"

Leopard begged, "My friend, help me. We agreed that whoever broke our oath to be friends, would lose a child."

Antelope replied, "It must have been your parent who made the oath. Now it is meant for you!"

------------------------------------------------------------



An old woman gave an egg to her grandson.

The boy gave the egg to berry pickers. 

They broke it.

The boy cried, “That egg was for bride wealth!”

The berry pickers gave him a stick.

The boy gave the stick to builders. 

They broke it.

The boy cried, “That stick belonged to the berry pickers!”

The builders gave him a bundle of grass.

The boy met a herder. 

A cow ate the grass.

The boy cried, “That grass belonged to the builders!”

The herder gave the boy a cow.

The boy found a marriage celebration. 

They slaughtered his cow.

The boy cried, “That cow belonged to the herder!”

The bride’s family gave him the bride.

------------------------------------------------------------



Look at the animals.

The cow says, "Moo."

The goat says, "Meh,  meh."

The horse says, "Neigh."

The pig says, "Grunt."

The chicken says, "Cluck."

The dog says, "Woof."

The farmer says, "Shhh!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Moussa, Albert and Agaicha, were on their way to school.

They saw a well-wrapped cardboard box. It looked like a toy.

Moussa said, "What do I see here? A toy! Let's go and get it!"

Agaicha replied, "Be careful! Remember what our teacher told us."  

Agaicha was very worried.

Moussa and Albert were impatient and curious.

They wanted to get the box and see what was inside.

Agaicha insisted.

"The teacher advised us to avoid touching objects we do not know and that do not belong to us. Let's inform him."

The teacher was informed of the object.

Immediately, he surrounded it with dead branches. This showed that the object could be dangerous.

The teacher informed the School Principal.

The Principal called in the security services to determine the nature of the object.

After inspecting the object, the security services confirmed that it was an explosive device. 

They immediately destroyed it.

The teacher was proud of his learners.

He said, "Children, you have been wise and careful. Caution is the mother of safety."

The children were congratulated by the teachers and the security services.

They received a hero's welcome from the whole school.

Later in the day, the teachers and other staff, held a meeting.

They discussed many security issues affecting the school and the community.

------------------------------------------------------------



When I was five years old, Uncle Wanga gave me a wonderful present. It was a three-week-old puppy! 

The day Uncle Wanga brought the puppy home, I was very happy. I knew I had a friend.

After putting him down, Uncle turned to me and asked, "What name will you give him?" 

I looked at my puppy, and said, "Coco." Uncle was surprised. He asked, "Why do you call him Coco?" 

I said, "Because he looks like cocoa."

I asked my uncle if Coco was born alone. 

My uncle said that there was another puppy, exactly like Coco. I went to see Coco's brother.

When Coco saw his brother, he was very excited. 

The two of them put their heads together as if they were talking.

I asked my uncle if I could keep both Coco and his brother. "All right," he said. "But you must look after them." 

So every evening, I played with them and took them for exercise.

A few months later, Coco and his brother were big, strong and healthy. 

They were too big for me to look after on my own.

So I asked my uncle to take back Coco's brother. But when Coco was left alone, he looked very sad. 

It felt as if he was asking me, "Why did you do that?"

He stopped playing. Sometimes he refused to go for a walk with me. There were times when Coco ate very little. 

I was worried. I asked myself, "What can I do to help Coco?"

Then one day my uncle came to visit. When I heard his voice, I rushed out of the house. 

Before I could see him, I heard the barking of dogs.

Behind the kitchen, dancing happily before me were Coco and his brother!

I was so happy that I did not know who to hug first, Coco or my uncle. 

I knew Coco would go back to his old self now that his brother was back. We would go running in the fields again!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day while I was sitting in class, I looked through the window and saw a big brown eagle fly past.

The eagle's wings were wide open but the wings weren't flapping. 

This made me curious. I wanted to know more about flying.

Maybe birds influenced the invention of airplanes. They both have wings.

I wish I could fly, but I do not have wings.
     
I went to the library to find books about airplanes. I wanted to know how they fly.

I saw pictures of different flying machines. Some machines had engines, some did not.

I saw a hang glider and a parachute. 

I saw a rocket, a helicopter, a zeppelin, hot air balloons, and some very old airplanes. Ones you could find in museums.

How does an airplane fly? Most modern airplanes are powered by jet engines.  

Jet engines move an airplane forward very fast. That makes the air flow very fast over the airplane's wings.

The wings push the air back towards the ground. That causes an upward pressure or force. The upward force holds an airplane in the sky.

The closest thing I can do to flying, is in an airplane. Have you ever been in an airplane? 

I have always dreamed of flying in a big airliner.

My teacher told us that we can make our wishes come true just by closing our eyes and imagining.

I am your pilot. I am the captain of this aeroplane.  

Please fasten your seatbelt and prepare to take off from the ground.

Clear the runway, I am starting the jet engines!

You are a passenger sitting at the window seat. 

We are speeding along the runway. We are taking off from the airport.

The airplane's engines and wings push us into the air. We will fly higher than any bird.

My teacher said we can do anything in our imagination.  

She said we can be whatever we want to be, or do anything we want in our minds 

Where would you like to fly to?

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandma loved me. 

She told me many secrets except one.

“What is the basket and leaves for?” 

Grandma said, “For magic.”

I wanted to watch. 

But grandma sent me to do something else.

“Where are they?” 

“They are in my magic place,” grandma said.

Grandma sent me to her room. 

I smelled ripening bananas.

I had discovered grandma’s magic place. 

I had seen the ripening bananas.

I ate one. 

It was the sweetest banana I had ever tasted.

I took four bananas. 

I hid them under my dress.

On market day, grandma took foodstuffs to sell. 

I was ashamed.

When I was called later, I knew why. 

I never stole again.

------------------------------------------------------------



My mom got me two puppies.

They were so cute!

I decided to name them Royalty and Blackie.

Royalty was brown and like a queen. 

Blackie was a lovely black dog with long hair.

I used to walk them everyday when I came from school.

Sometimes I would bath them by myself. 

Royalty would always run away!

Then, we moved and went to a flat. 

They didn't allow dogs there.

We left Blackie and Royalty with my cousins.

One morning, I decided to visit my dogs.

I found that Blackie was lost, and Royalty was lonely. 

 I felt very bad in my heart.

------------------------------------------------------------



Fana and her family live in Debre Birhan, a busy town in Ethiopia. Fana is a Grade 3 student. 

She is good-hearted and wise.

Fana loves animals. She has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove. 

She spends time with these animals, feeding them, and playing with them.

One day, Fana was playing in the school yard with her friends. 

She noticed some children throwing stones at doves. "Why are they hurting the doves?" she asked herself.

She stopped playing and ran towards the children who were throwing stones. At first her friends didn't understand what was happening, then they followed her.

"Stop throwing stones!" shouted Fana.

The other children ran away. 

Fana caught the two injured doves. She saw wounds on their wings. 

She decided to take the two doves home to look after them.

She fed the doves. In the evening she told her family about how she saved the doves.

In the morning, Fana and her parents went to the clinic and got medicine for the doves. 

After a few days, the doves' wounds healed. Fana felt very happy.

Fana always tells her friends, "I love animals. Animals help us and they are our friends. We must protect and preserve them."

------------------------------------------------------------



Amara was walking through the park. 

The trees in the park were green and healthy. 

But, there was one tree that was brown and dry.

"This tree needs water," said Amara to herself.

She watered the tree and it came to life with new growth.

It was a magnificent green tree.

Then, the tree spoke! 

"You watered me and brought me back to life," said the tree.

"I'm a magic tree, I shall grant you three wishes."

Amara made her first wish.

"I wish for a red bicycle," she said cautiously.

Abracadabra! A red bicycle appeared.

She made her second wish after thinking for a few moments.

"I wish for a radio," said Amara. 

Abracadabra! A radio appeared.

Amara made her third wish.

"I wish for pink crystal earrings," she said happily.

Abracadabra! Pink crystal earrings appeared.

The magic tree said, "You have everything that you wanted."

Amara smiled, "Yes I do, but those things were not for me." 

The magic tree looked confused.

"The bicycle is for my older brother. He outgrew his bicycle. The radio is for Dad. His radio broke. The earrings are for Mum. She loves fancy earrings," explained Amara.

"And they will all share with me!" she added.

------------------------------------------------------------



Afeefah is a baby white rhinoceros.

Rangers rescued her from the bush.

Her mum was killed by poachers.

The rangers took Afeefah to a place of safety.

Afeefah's heart was broken.

And, she was afraid that the poachers would return to take her horn.

Slowly, Afeefah made friends.

She felt safe and played in the mud.

She drank nutritious milk at the sanctuary.

One day Afeefah asked her friend Aaminah, "Why do they want our horns?"

Aaminah snorted, "They believe that our horns are magical!"

"But our horns are not magical!" cried Afeefah.

"No, of course not. Horns are the same as hair and nails," said Aaminah.

Afeefah and Aaminah are the last of their kind.

The white rhinoceros is nearly extinct.

They are almost all gone from our world.

We can save the rhino and other animals that are almost extinct.

What can you do?

Find out more!

------------------------------------------------------------



When Akai was a little girl, her mother used to put her to sleep on a beautiful mat. 

Akai's aunt made this special mat from palm leaves.

The mat had bright pink, blue and green colours. 

It was different from other mats that Akai's mother had in the hut.

The land around Akai's home was very dry, hot and full of stones. There were many scorpions, spiders and snakes too. 

But Akai was never in danger of being bitten by these dangerous creatures.

Her mother said, "Her special mat protects Akai from any harm."

Akai was a clever child. 

She discovered where the nearest shallow well was.

Akai also knew where her grandmother's manyatta was located. 

She often went to drink camel milk with her grandmother.

One day, Akai was not so lucky. She left to go to her grandmother's manyatta, but she got lost in the hills. 

Akai was afraid.

She sat under an edome tree and waited for help. 

Soon she fell asleep and had a dream.

This is what Akai dreamed: She was lying on her special mat. A woman who looked like her grandmother was watching over her. The old woman smiled and gave her a bowl of camel milk. Just when Akai stretched out her hand to take the milk, she woke up.

Akai opened her eyes slowly. 

When she looked up, she saw a small blue bird on a branch above her.

When Akai got up, the small blue bird flapped its wings and led the way for Akai. 

She followed the bird.

Akai came to a place where the path went in two different directions. 

The blue bird dropped a piece of a mat that was like Akai's own mat.

Picking up the piece of mat, Akai saw footprints that she knew were her mother's. 

Soon she saw the shallow well from where they fetched water.

Akai's family sang and danced to welcome her home. 

They slaughtered a goat, roasted the meat and celebrated their child's safe return.

Akai sat on her special mat and enjoyed eating a big piece of roast meat.

------------------------------------------------------------



Madina is the eldest daughter of the Karembe family.

The family lives in Bandiagara.

One evening, Madina went to close the door.

She saw a girl and a boy.

Madina was surprised to see two strange children.

She called out to her father, "Daddy! Daddy! There are two children at the door."

Father rushed out to the door.

When he saw the children, he asked, "Who are you? Where are you from?"

The boy spoke, "I'm Assama, and this is my little sister, Yakôrômo."

Assama and Yakôrômo looked tired, scared and sad.

Assama continued to explain, "We've come from the village of Songho, in the rural commune of Doucombo."

Father was so shocked that he was speechless.

Madina said, "Dad, let them in. They're very tired and hungry. They need us."

Yakôrômo spoke for the first time.

"Our village was attacked. We lost our parents. We lost everything."

She continued to speak in a small voice.

"We've been walking for days. We don't know where to go or what to do."

Then, with open arms, Father embraced the children.

"Come in, children, this is your home. We'll talk about it when you've rested," he said.

The children joined the family for dinner, the first hot meal they had had in days.

Afterward, Madina took Assama and Yakôrômo to their rooms.

From that day, Assama and Yakoromo were considered members of the KAREMBE family.

They play and do all the housework with the other children.

------------------------------------------------------------



Monkey and Hyena had an argument. 

They went to a judge.

The judge thought, "Monkey will eat my maize.

Hyena will eat my cattle!"

The judge told Monkey and Hyena to ask the
village elders.

The elders also feared to pass judgement on
Monkey or Hyena.

The elders told Monkey and Hyena, "The case is
very difficult."

They told Monkey and Hyena to ask the poor woman in the village.

The poor woman agreed to judge their case.

She said to Hyena, "You are big and respected. You are a hero."

Hyena said, "You are right. I will end this disagreement."

"Monkey, you are too clever to quarrel," she said.

He agreed!

She said, "You both agreed to stop quarrelling.
Forgive each other."

The poor woman solved the problem.

------------------------------------------------------------



It has always been Atta's dream to travel by bus someday.

One day, Atta's father told him that they would be traveling to Kumasi by bus.

Atta was very happy to hear this news.

On the day of their journey, Atta and his father went to the bus station.

His father purchased tickets for both of them. They waited for their turn to board the bus.

The time came to board the bus.

The driver's assistant checked their tickets before allowing them to get on.

Once the bus was full, the driver took his seat and drove off.

On the way, they passed towns like Suhum, Nsawam, Anyinam and Nkawkaw.

At Anyinam, the driver stopped the bus.

The passengers got off and used the restroom.

At Nkawkaw, the passengers bought some bread from the traders.

The bus finally arrived in Kumasi, and all the passengers disembarked.

It was an exciting day for Atta because, at long last, his dream had come true.

------------------------------------------------------------



Why is the baby crying?

I think she is hungry.

Why is the boy sad?

I think he is missing his father.

Why is the girl happy?

She has a new dress.

Why is the old man laughing?

He read a good joke.

Why is the lady smiling?

Her children are reading quietly.

What is this lady feeling?

I think she is feeling shy.

------------------------------------------------------------



I was my mother's only child.

My mother made sure that I went to school.

My mother likes to take me to the market.

My mother and I enjoy shopping together.

My mother loves God.

She encourages me to pray every morning.

My mother loves me very much.

My mother loves my cousin, too. 

He comes to visit every weekend.

At night, my mother always tucks me into bed before I sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a young man called Pontshibobo. When he was little he was a very good boy. 

He had grown into a very good man. He respected everybody he met.

Pontsihibobo had a friend called Hippo. He was not respectful like Pontshibobo. 

One day Pontshibobo and Hippo were walking down the street together. Hippo had an idea, "Let's go and smoke a zol," he said.

Pontshibobo was surprised. "Why do you ask me to smoke with you? You know that I don't smoke."

Hippo got cross. "If you don't want to smoke with me you can't be my friend," he said and walked off.

Pontshibobo went home and sat under the tree in his yard and cried.

"Why are you crying?" asked the tree. Pontshibobo got a huge fright. He had never heard a tree talking before. 

He told the tree about Hippo. "I have lost a friend," he said.

The tree asked Pontshibobo, "What do you really wish for?" Pontshibobo thought for a while. 

Then he replied, "I want a house. I am grown up now and I want a home. I want to marry and have children."

The tree also thought for a while. "Take my leaves and my branches and build yourself a house with them," he said. 

Pontshibobo did as the tree told him and he built a small, beautiful house. He married and had children. 

He was happy.

But the tree was not happy. Pontshibobo had forgotten all about him and he felt sad. "I need a friend," the tree said to himself, "or else I will die." 

Just at that moment Pontshibobo came into the yard. He heard what the tree said,  and he saw that the tree was very sick.

Pontshibobo was also sad. He had forgotten all about the tree that had helped him build a house for his wife and children. 

"I am so sorry," he cried and gave the tree a big hug.

When the tree saw that his friend was back he smiled. 

He grew new branches and fresh leaves.

Pontshibobo's children climbed up the branches of the tree. Pontshibobo and his wife sat in the shade after a long day at work. 

They told stories and laughed and were happy. Pontshibobo and the tree were friends forever.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mimi ni Maria.

Huyu ni mama yangu.

Huyu ni mtoto.

Huyu ni baba yangu.

Huyu ni kaka yangu.

Huyu ni dada yangu.

Huyu ni bibi yangu.

Huyu ni babu yangu.

Huyu ni mjomba wangu.

Huyu ni shangazi yangu.

Hii ni familia yangu.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Otoyo. He is eight years old. 

He is in standard three.

Otoyo has a sister. 

He loves her very much.

Otoyo and his sister play with their friend Akinyi on weekends.

Otoyo lives with his parents and his grandparents.

Otoyo goes to Umoja Primary School.

He likes school very much.

Otoyo works hard. 

He likes his teacher.

Otoyo's father is a game warden.

He takes them to the animal park.

Otoyo goes to church with his parents.

He likes singing.

Otoyo likes drawing pictures. 

He loves his life.

------------------------------------------------------------



Kiprono and I were desk-mates in school. We were both interested in hunting deer.

We enjoyed it very much.

On weekends, we went hunting together with other boys from our village.

We were not always successful. On some days we managed to catch a fat deer while on other days, just a hare.

At times we would come back empty-handed.

When we caught deer, we would slaughter the animal and give some meat to our dogs to motivate them.

Our dogs enjoyed the meat, taking their time to chew it.

One day, we ventured deep into the forest. After an hour of hunting without success, we agreed to divide the group into two.

We took different paths. We agreed on where to meet after hunting.

We had only covered about twenty metres of our journey.

We heard Dunge, one of the boys who was behind, scream so loudly. We stopped to enquire.

Dunge was so shaken. He tried to speak but he could not. He pointed at his leg as he cried in pain. 

Sakaja, the oldest of us, searched around and saw a very big snake slithering away into the bush.

We were so terrified.

Sakaja quickly tore up his shirt and tied Dunge's leg. 

This action would prevent the blood from flowing back to the heart. This would give us time to get help for Dunge.

We carried Dunge shoulder-high back to the road. We needed to get him to the hospital. 

We hiked a lift from a pickup truck. We managed to get to the hospital in time and our friend was attended to.

We went back home very shaken. Though we did not catch any animal that day, we were thankful that Dunge was safe. 

Since that day, we stopped hunting. Now, we spent our free time in the fields grazing our goats and cows.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long, long ago there was a king called Kayanja. He lived in a palace with his queen and their daughter, Princess Apenyo. 

Princess Apenyo was such a beautiful young woman that every man wanted to marry her. But king Kayanja demanded a very high bride price for the princess.

Near king Kayanja's palace lived a chief called Aludah the Great. He was called "the Great" because everybody in the neighbourhood obeyed him, and he was very violent to anyone who disobeyed him! 

Chief Aludah's wife had recently died of malaria, and he wanted another wife.

So the fat old chief went to king Kayanja to offer bride wealth for the young princess. 

While the two men were discussing the price, the maid Kakembo overheard their conversation. Maid Kakembo was very close to princess Apenyo.

Chief Aludah agreed to give half of his wealth to king Kayanja, including a needle, which was also part of the bride price. 

Preparations were made in secret for the wedding between chief Aludah and princess Apenyo. The king knew that his daughter would not be happy with this decision.

One week before the royal wedding day, maid Kakembo approached Apenyo. "My dear Princess,  your father has organised your wedding with chief Aludah, and it will take place in one week."

Princess Apenyo was shocked and at first didn't know what to do. 

Then she thought, "I will never marry chief Aludah, that fat old man. Never! I must hurry to Trevor and see what he can do before it's too late." 

Trevor was princess Apenyo's boyfriend.

That night Apenyo crept out of the palace. If her father discovered where she was going he would be very angry. 

She ran through the thick, dark forest over rocks and shrubs. When finally she arrived at Trevor's house she was tired and thirsty.

"My love, why have you run all this long distance alone and at such a time of night?" asked Trevor. 

He fetched water for her and allowed her to rest. Trevor could not settle down while he waited for Apenyo to talk.

"My dear princess, what is the problem?" asked Trevor. 

Apenyo breathed heavily and said sadly, "My father wants to marry me off to chief Aludah the Great. But I can't marry that horrible man. Trevor, I want to marry you even if you are poor. I am ready to suffer. I love you."

"But princess, I have nothing to pay as your bride price, you know I'm a poor boy," cried Trevor. 

Apenyo replied, "I know, but it's only you I can get married to." She thought for a while and said, "Let's go to Kategga the boatman and ask him to take us across the river. That way we can escape and my father will never find us."

Back at the palace, king Kayanja had discovered princess Apenyo's disappearance. He ordered his subjects to search for her everywhere. 

The king's guards, soldiers, and everyone else searched, but they couldn't find the princess. 

They went back to the king and told him that Apenyo was nowhere to be seen. "Then go back and search again," King Kayanja ordered. He was very annoyed.

As Princess Apenyo and Trevor hurried to the riverbank, dark clouds began gathering in the sky. 

A heavy storm was coming.

Kategga the boatman was mooring his boat when the young couple approached him. Trevor asked Kategga to row them across the river. 

Kategga refused to accept, explaining that a heavy storm was fast approaching, and it would be too dangerous.

Trevor insisted and explained to Kategga why they must cross. He then put his hand deep in his pocket and took out a cowrie shell to give to Kategga. 

When Kategga heard their story and saw the beautiful shell, he felt sorry for them. He agreed to row them across the river in spite of the weather.

When King Kayanja and chief Aludah reached the bank, they saw the three people in the boat. They realised that the young lovers had escaped. 

Heavy winds rocked the boat and Kategga could no longer control it. King Kayanja shouted, "Apenyo, please come back! I forgive you. I will never punish you or Trevor."

But, it was too late. The boat tipped over and the three people were thrown into the wild water. They all drowned. 

After that day, everyone in king Kayanja's kingdom could marry anyone they wanted, rich or poor.

------------------------------------------------------------



Hello, I'm Ntombi. I'm a little girl like other little girls,  except I have a crocodile in my body. 

You can't see him, but I know he is there. His name is Horrible InVader. He hides in my body and doesn't do any harm to my friends.

He won't leave my body and go into yours if you sit next to me, or hold my hand.

He won't leave my body and jump into yours even if you share your lunch with me, or lie down on the floor together when we have a rest.

My crocodile, Horrible InVader, has been with me since I was born. He likes eating all the soldiers in my body that fight germs and stop me from getting sick. 

When he eats too many of my soldiers, I get very sick. Then I cannot go to school and play with my friends.

I have to take my medicine every day at the same time. Otherwise my crocodile wakes up in a bad mood and eats my soldiers again. 

I don't want him to do that, so I remind my Gogo to give me my special medicine right on time.

If I eat good food like vegetables and fruit, my soldiers in my body get stronger and don't let my crocodile catch them. 

I think he goes to sleep for a while, because then I am well and strong and able to play with my friends again. I am so happy when he goes to sleep and I am able to play.

My Gogo took me to the clinic a while ago and got something special to feed my crocodile. It makes him go to sleep, and he doesn't eat my soldiers. 

Then I am able to do all the fun things that other children do, like run and climb and dance.

I love my Gogo very much. She is good and kind to me. She gives me good food to eat and sees that I take extra vitamins as well to keep my soldiers strong, so that I don't get sick. 

If I do get sick she takes me to the clinic straight away, so that I can get medicine to make me better. I love it when she puts me on her lap and reads stories to me before I go to bed.

After Gogo has put me to bed, I think of many things. I think about learning to read at big school. If I keep taking my special medicine that puts my crocodile to sleep, I will look after my Gogo and read her stories when she is very old and can't see so well anymore. 

When I am a grown woman, I would like to study. I want to help to find a medicine that will put all the crocodiles in other peoples' bodies, to sleep forever.

I will learn to live with my crocodile and keep him asleep as much as I can. 

I will have as many friends as I can. And have as much fun as I can every day.

My Gogo, my aunts and uncles, and friends love me, even though I have a crocodile called Horrible InVader living in my body.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a small forest lived a family of pangolins.

They lived happily eating raw termites and ants.

The people of surrounding villages lived peacefully with the pangolins.

One day, things turned upside down!

People from faraway places started digging up pangolins' homes.

They captured the pangolins and took them away.

"Mama, why are people destroying our homes?" asked baby pangolin.

Mama Pangolin replied, "They believe that our scales are worth a fortune."

"Others say that our flesh can cure any illness," added Papa Pangolin.

Everyone started hunting for pangolins, including the villagers.

Many pangolins went to hide at the chief's house.

The village head became concerned about it.

He declared it illegal to hunt or harm a pangolin.

The chief sent out his men to catch the pangolin hunters.

The pangolin hunters became the hunted.

A man and a woman were arrested trying to cross the border carrying two pangolins.

The rescued pangolins were returned to the forest.

The villagers obeyed the new law.

Others even learned how to protect the pangolins.

The hunt for pangolins ended.

The pangolins lived happily and safely once again.

------------------------------------------------------------



Abby and Layla are two dogs who live in Johannesburg.

They are both two years old.

They like to play in their garden.

Abby and Layla love to go to the park. 

At the park they can run around very fast.

They can jump over the little streams at the park.

Abby and Layla also like to run around on the hills.

On the hills, they play with other dogs.

When they get home, after running around, they are very tired. 

Shush, Abby and Layla are sleeping!

------------------------------------------------------------



In the old days, there were two people, Dima and Owl. Owl owned the sun, water and fire. 

Dima did not have any of these things and lived in darkness with his family.

Dima tried to make a garden, but he could not grow vegetables because there was no sun. Everybody suffered because there was no sun. 

When they hunted animals to eat, they hung the meat in the trees to dry, but it rotted because there was no sun.

One day, Dima decided to visit Owl. When they served food, Dima wondered why Owl's food tasted so good. He wondered if it was because the food grew in the sun and it was cooked in fire. 

Secretly, Dima made a plan. He decided to dance. He wanted everyone at Owl's place to gather around him and see him dance. He was a good dancer. Owl and his family admired the beautiful dancing.

When it grew dark, Owl decided to fetch the sun from his house so that he could still watch Dima's dancing. Owl kept the sun in an animal skin bag inside his hut. 

He carried the sun out from his house and held it high up above his shoulders. Now it was light. Everyone could see far into the distance. 

Soon everyone was dancing in the light of the sun.

Dima crept closer to the sun while he was dancing. Owl held on to the sun but after a while he forgot about it because he enjoyed the dancing so much. 

He saw how beautifully Dima danced. He too wanted to dance like this.

Suddenly, Dima took his fighting stick and hit the sun into the air like a ball. 

The sun travelled so far that it remained forever in the sky. It gave everyone light all day.

Dima ran away so fast that Owl could not find him. He stayed far away for a long time. After a while, he disguised himself and went back to Owl's place. 

The children recognised him and said, "There is the man who stole our sun!" 

The adults did not agree with the children and said, "No, this is not the man who stole our sun."

They saw that this man was an old dancer. He wore a lot of beads around his body. They were magic dancing beads and they made people dance. 

It was not long before everyone was dancing. They danced the whole afternoon, until the sun began to set. It became too dark to see the magic dancer.

Owl said to his wife, "Go and look in my bag and fetch the moon." 

Owl held the moon high above his shoulders and it lit up the darkness for all to see the dance. 

While they were dancing, Dima moved closer and closer to the moon, for he had a plan.

He took his fighting stick and hit the moon high up into the air. 

Once again, he ran away from Owl. This time he stayed away for a very long time, until Owl's family forgot all about him.

Dima disguised himself again and returned to Owl's place. This time he wanted Owl's fire. Owl had the firesticks hanging around his neck. 

Dima joined Owl under a tree and the two men started playing an old clapping game called gi.

They clapped and clapped and as they clapped some more, Owl's firesticks started jumping around his chest to the rhythm of the clapping. Clap-clap, clap-clap. 

Dima tried to grab the firesticks, but Owl threw them over his neck so that they hung across his back.

They clapped the whole day long. The rhythm of the clapping made Owl forget all about the firesticks. When they swung around onto his chest once more, Dima grabbed the firesticks and ran away. 

Owl and his family ran after Dima, but he made a clever plan. He had a bag full of thorns and threw them onto the ground behind him. This stopped Owl and his family from chasing him. They could not cross the thorns on the path.

Dima could not wait to make fire. He rubbed and rubbed the sticks. He blew and blew the ember in a little dry grass until a tiny flame appeared. 

The fire grew and lit the whole veld and each time the flames reached a tree, Dima said, "From now on people will be able to make a fire with each tree on earth."

A long time passed. When Dima finally returned to Owl's place, he found no one but a little boy playing with wooden animals. 

Dima asked the boy to show him where they kept their water. The boy led him to the place of water. Dima saw the big djaba, the huge clay pot in which the family stored water.

Dima pretended to leave for his home, but he secretly turned round to the place of water. He turned the huge pot over so that the water started flowing on the ground. 

Dima quickly jumped over the flowing water to the other side. Then he was safely across the river of water where Owl could not find him.

This is why the whole earth has rivers full of water today. 

This is why we have the sun, moon and fire, because of the magician Dima.

Story notes In 2003,  Katunga Carimbwe told this version of the Dima and Owl origin story to Titu Mangumbu and Marlene Winberg in the Northern Cape Province of South Africa while he was busy painting on a canvas. Mangumbu, Mahongo and Winberg translated it and retold the story in this written version with as few alterations as possible. His elders told the story to him during his childhood in Mavinga, Angola, where he was born in 1958. Xun and other closely related languages, although the names and identities of the trickster, Dima, and his adversary change from area to area. The "clapping game" mentioned in Dima and Owl, is still current among the!xun, the Nharo, and other communities of Kalahari San. This story depicts Dima as a culture hero and transformer of the primeval world into the present world. He achieves this with words, "From now on people will be able to make a fire with each tree on earth." The Manyeka Arts Trust holds a!Xun audio telling of this story by Meneputo Mnaunga Maneka in archive. The illustrations in this story are from story boards by Marlene Winberg interpreted digitally by Satsiri Winberg through manipulations of the Manyeka Art Collection of paintings made by San artists /Thaalu Rumao, /Tuoi Samcuia and Joao Wenne Dikuango, who have all passed away since.

------------------------------------------------------------



My village had many problems. 

We made a long line to fetch water from one tap.

We waited for food donated by others.

We locked our houses early because of thieves.

Many children dropped out of school.

Young girls worked as maids in other villages.

Young boys roamed around the village.

 Others worked on people's farms.

When the wind blew, waste paper hung on trees and fences.

We threw broken glass carelessly.

People were cut by it.

Then one day, the tap dried up.

 Our containers were empty.

My father walked from house to house.

He asked people to attend a village meeting.

People gathered under a big tree and listened.

My father stood up.

He said, "We need to work together to solve our problems."

Eight-year-old Juma, was sitting on a tree trunk. 

He shouted, "I can help with cleaning up."

One woman said, "The women can join me to grow food."

Another man stood up and said, "The men will dig a well."

We all shouted with one voice, "We must change our lives." 

From that day we worked together to solve our problems.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was a man who had a very serious wound on his leg. He could not stand or walk. 

This man lived in a village with his wife and their children.

The couple had three sons and one daughter. The daughter's name was Nangila. Her duty was to take care of her father. 

The sons worked on the land and grazed animals.

Nangila was a beautiful girl. All the villagers liked and respected her. 

Her parents wanted a good husband for Nangila. They set a difficult task in order to find the right man.

Anyone who wanted to marry Nangila would have to get a herb from a lake near the village. 

This herb would heal her father's wound. But the lake was filled with dangerous spirits.

Some men tried to get the herb but returned without it. 

Some men did not return from the lake at all.

Nangila felt worried. Not even her brothers would go to the lake. One day, she decided to fetch the herb herself. 

Her mother said, "My daughter, if strong men have failed, how will you succeed?" 

But Nangila had made up her mind.

On the way to the lake, Nangila met an old woman carrying wood. She helped the woman to carry her firewood. 

The old woman was grateful. She said to Nangila, "I will tell you how to reach the spirit lake and what to do when you get there."

When she reached the shore of the lake, Nangila saw the spirit family drinking and dancing. 

She waited and watched. One by one, the spirits fell asleep.

Once the spirits were all sleeping, Nangila dived into the lake. 

She found the herb and put it in her bag. As she swam back to land, the waves were rising.

When Nangila reached the shore the spirits were awake. She sang the song the old woman taught her: 

I, daughter of Wekesa, am from the lake. I came because men are too scared to come. My father needs this herb to heal his wound. That is why I am here where many are scared to reach, for you are the rulers.

Nangila's voice was so sweet that the spirits asked her to sing for them again and again. Her singing sent the spirits back to sleep. 

Then Nangila ran very fast until she got to her village.

Everyone was waiting for Nangila to return. After treating his wound with the herb her father was able to stand again. 

The entire village danced and praised Nangila.

------------------------------------------------------------



My village has goats. 

It is far from big cities.

Mother said, “Elly, we have a present for your sixth birthday.”

Mother, aunt and I waited for the bus.

I sat on mother’s lap. 

I slept the whole way.

We reached the market. 

I saw a beautiful blue helicopter.

One stall had fruits. 

I asked mother, “Which ones are these?”

Mother said, “These are apples.” 

I begged, “Please, buy me one.”

I forgot my mother’s hand. 

I thought only of my apple.

When I finished eating, I was alone. 

I started to cry.

A woman took me where there were other children.

I thought children were sold at the market. 

I cried more.

A man asked, “Where is Elly?”

I hid away from him.

My mother’s familiar voice called, “Elly!” 

I was very happy.

My aunt pulled out a beautiful helicopter. 

“It's yours!” she said.

------------------------------------------------------------



A bajaj is a three-wheeled vehicle. 

It is used in town to move fast from place to place.

In our community, driving is a male-dominated activity.  

Females are usually not involved in it.

One day, Abebech asked her parents to give her money to take driving lessons. 

Her parents said to her, "This work is not good for girls. What would people say?"

However, Abebech said, "I have the ability to do anything other people do." She convinced them.  

Her parents permitted her to start taking driving lessons.

Abebech successfully completed the training. 

Her parents discussed what to do next.

Afterwards they agreed to buy a bajaj for her. 

So, Abebech started to drive a bajaj on Debre Birhan roads.

One day Abebech had a great idea. 

She posted at the back of her bajaj a notice with her phone number on it.

The notice read, "I transport for free, pregnant women, mothers who have delivered, and children."

Women and mothers whose children got sick all called Abebech.

Abebech earned money by transporting people. 

She continued to give free service to people who did not have money.

Abebech was very happy with her work. The elderly blessed her. Everybody talked about her work all the time.

Abebech told them, "Doing good pays off."

------------------------------------------------------------



Amara was nine years old. She went to Kerema primary school. Her favorite subjects were English, Science and Social Studies.

She wanted to be a lawyer when she grew up. Amara loved animals very much.

Amara lived with her mother, Margy. She was a very hardworking farmer.

Amara's father died when she was 5 years old.

When Amara was not at school, she spent her time with Mbisa, the goat.

She cleaned and fed it.

Amara also had her pet, Simba. Her mother did not like  dogs very much, but she let Amara keep Simba.

Whenever Simba disturbed her, she would shout, "Go away before I kick you out." Amara felt sad.

One Saturday, they had visitors from the women's group.

Amara was happy that her mother's friends had come with their children. They could play football.

Her mother had prepared the food that the group liked.

Amara was reminded by her mother to keep Simba locked up. It barked at strangers.

Amara did not lock up Simba well. The visitors were surprised to see the dog in the room.

Mama Oto asked, "Why do you allow the dog to come inside the house?"

Amara's mother called Amara to come and take Simba out.

Amara did not hear her mother calling because they were busy playing.

When Amara went to the house, she called Simba out. Simba was very obedient to Amara.

 After the meal, the visitors said, "We'll also treat our dogs well like Amara. We mistreat them and yet they are so helpful."

Afterwards, Amara's mother apologised for being mean and cruel to  Simba. Amara was happy that her mother accepted her dog at last.

When Amara is in school her mother feeds Simba. Her mother's friends have learned to be good to their dogs.

------------------------------------------------------------



How many legs do two ladybirds have?

How many wings do four birds have?

How many horns do three rhinos have?

How many trunks do five elephants have?

How many ears do seven dogs have?

How many tails do three monkeys have?

How many eyes do six cats have?

How many legs does one worm have?

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Maggy's cat. 

The cat's name is Doris.

What a naughty cat!

Everybody loves this cat. 

They play with Doris too.

Maggy enjoys watching Doris resting with mother cat. 

Doris has two brothers.

Maggy loves cats! 

But cats do not like to be hugged.

Maggy's friend and her family came to visit Doris the cat. 

They brought a present for Doris. Maggy is so happy about this.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there lived two friends, Hyena and Hare. 

Hyena was a hardworking farmer. He woke up early every morning and went to work in his field.

Hare woke up when it was already broad daylight. 

He would yawn and stretch. Then he would go looking for food.

Most mornings, Hare would take some seeds from Hyena's granary. Then he went to his field and pretended to work. 

He would light a fire and roast the seeds. He did nothing, except eat roasted seeds.

At harvest time, Hare went and stole his friend's ripe maize. 

He carried it to his own granary.

Hyena complained about the stolen crops. 

Hare answered, "Maybe the neighbours stole your maize. They are suffering from famine because they are lazy."

Hyena thought about this problem for a long time. He came up with an idea. 

He collected gum from the trees. He put that sticky gum around the whole field. The thief would get stuck in the gum.

During the night, Hare went to Hyena's field to steal more maize. 

Before entering the field he looked around to see if it was safe.

Hare did not see the gum that Hyena had put around the field. 

Hare stood in the gum and was stuck. He started shouting for help.

Hyena heard the shouts and ran out to catch the thief. 

He could not believe his eyes. It was his friend Hare who was stuck in the gum!

From that time, Hyena went his way and Hare went the other way. 

That marked the end of their friendship.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ipusi yange irihe?  

Where is my cat?

Ese yaba iri munsi y'igitanda? 

Could it be under the bed?

Yaba iri hejuru y'akabati se? 

Could it be on the top of the wardrobe?

Ese iri inyuma y'intebe?

Could it be behind the chair?

Yaba iri mu ndoboy'imyanda? 

Could it be in the dustbin?

Ese iri mu gitebo? 

Could it be in the basket?

Yagiye hanze se?  

Could it have gone out?

Dore ngiyi hano! 

Here it is!

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Agnes. She is my teacher.

Agnes uses crutches to walk.

This is Metobo. He is my favourite radio DJ.

Metobo has problems with his eyes.

This is Moraa,  my neighbour. Moraa is a farmer.

Moraa cannot hear. She speaks using Sign Language.

This is Osero. He is the best soccer player at my school.

Osero has no hands. But he scores many goals for our team!

------------------------------------------------------------



Mouse was looking for a new house.

This looks like a nice house.

"You can come and sleep with me," said Puppy.

"Thank you," said Mouse.

That night, Mouse's dreams were bouncy and muddy.

"You can come and sleep with me," said Parrot.

"Thank you," said Mouse.

That night, Mouse's dreams were noisy and wild.

"You can come and sleep with me," said Fish.

 "Thank you," said Mouse.

That night, Mouse's dreams were cold and wet.

Mouse needed somewhere warm and dry.



Mouse found a bookshelf nearby.

That night, Mouse had warm and cosy dreams.

Good night Mouse.

------------------------------------------------------------



Nhyirah was a young girl who lived with her parents. She was the last born and her siblings were outside the country. 

Nhyirah loved her toys more than anything.

Nhyirah did not like to share.

Whether it was at school, during playtime, Nhyirah wanted all the fun to herself.

One day, Nhyirah's best friend, Akos, came over to play with her. At first, everything was great. 

When Akos wanted to play with Nhyirah's favorite toy, Nhyirah said, "No, it's mine!"

Offended and upset, Akos decided to leave early. 

Nyirah didn't understand why her friend was sad. Then she noticed how lonely she felt playing by herself.

The next day, at the park, Nhyirah saw a group of children sharing toys and having fun together. 

Curious, she watched them for a while and realized that sharing toys makes playing even better!

Slowly, Nhyirah began to learn the magic of sharing.

She saw how it made her friends happy and made playtime much more enjoyable for everyone.

Nhyirah invited her friends over to play with them. 

For the first time, Nhyirah happily shared her favorite toys. Their joyful laughter filled the compound.

On that day, Nhyirah learned a very important lesson.

She learned that sharing is not about giving up what she loves. Sharing is about having fun with the people she cares about.

------------------------------------------------------------



Look,  fire!

Fire burns.

Fire cooks.

Fire gives warmth.

Fire gives light.

Look,  fire!

Fire is wonderful.

And it is powerful.

------------------------------------------------------------



Things are better when they are ready.

Ready means you have waited for it to be better.

Fruit is sweeter if it stays on the tree for a longer time.

Is the fruit ready?

The flowers are pretty if you let them grow.

Are the flowers ready?

The maize will be big if you let it grow.

Is the maize ready?

Nshima is better if you wait for it to cook.

Is the nshima ready?

The porridge is very hot if you don't let it cool.

Is the porridge ready?

You are good at football if you practice.

Are you ready to play?

It is good to wait for things to be ready.

Things are better when they are ready!

------------------------------------------------------------



It was a little girl who first saw the mysterious shape in the distance.

As the shape moved closer, the girl saw that it was a heavily pregnant woman.

Shy but brave, the little girl moved nearer to the woman. 

"We must keep her with us," the little girl's people decided. "We'll keep her and her child safe."

The child was soon on its way. Everyone wanted to help. 

"Push!" "Bring blankets!" "Water!" "Puuuuusshh!"

But when they saw the baby, everyone jumped back in shock. 

"A donkey!"

Everyone began to argue. "We said we would keep mother and child safe, and that's what we'll do," said some. 

"But they will bring us bad luck!" said others.

And so the woman found herself alone again. 

She wondered what to do with this awkward child. She wondered what to do with herself.

But finally she had to accept that he was her child and she was his mother. 

Now, if the child had stayed that same, small size, everything might have been different. But the donkey child grew and grew!

He could no longer fit on his mother's back. And no matter how hard he tried, he could not behave like a human being. 

His mother was often tired and frustrated. Sometimes she made him do work meant for animals.

Confusion and anger built up inside Donkey. He couldn't do this and he couldn't do that. He couldn't be like this and he couldn't be like that. 

He became so angry that, one day, he kicked his mother to the ground.

Donkey was filled with shame. 

He ran away as far and as fast as he could.

By the time he stopped running, it was night, and Donkey was lost. "Hee haw?" he whispered to the darkness. "Hee Haw?" it echoed back. 

He was all alone. Curling himself into a tight ball, he fell into a deep and troubled sleep.

Donkey woke up to find a strange old man staring down at him. 

He looked into the old man's eyes and started to feel a twinkle of hope.

Donkey went to stay with the old man, who taught him many different ways to survive. 

Donkey listened and learned, and so did the old man. They helped each other, and they laughed together.

One morning, the old man asked Donkey to carry him to the top of a mountain.

High up amongst the clouds they fell asleep. 

Donkey dreamed that his mother was sick and calling to him.

When Donkey woke up, the clouds had disappeared along with his friend, the old man.

Donkey finally knew what to do.

Donkey found his mother, alone and mourning her lost child. 

They stared at each other for a long time. And then hugged each other very hard.

The donkey child and his mother have grown together and found many ways of living together. 

Slowly, all around them, other families have started to settle.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a community called Yanki, many people were very poor.

There was no money, food or water.

The villagers were always afraid that thieves would take the little they had.

Some people suffered from diseases such as ulcer and kwashiokor.

Most children dropped out of school because there was no money to pay their fees.

One day, 8-year-old Ryan suggested that the community should come together to farm and dig a new well.

The village elders thought about it for a while and agreed that it was a good idea

That evening, they called the village town crier to announce Ryan's idea.

They all came together and the men dug a new well.

The women planted enough crops to provide food for the entire village.

------------------------------------------------------------



My heart feels a lot of things.

I feel happy when my granny tells us stories in the evening.

I feel silly when I play with my friend.

I feel bad when my dad says he does not have money.

I feel loved when my mom gives me a hug.

------------------------------------------------------------



Aweh and his wife, Kaweh, lived in a village called Ayeatia. 

Although Aweh had a loose tongue he was a very hard working farmer. 

He went to the farm every day. His dog named 'Noproblem' usually followed him to the farm.

One day at the farm, Aweh walked around the part he had not yet finished weeding.

With only one hoe in his hand, Aweh laughed aloud, "Ha, ha, ha, aa! Rain or shine I will finish weeding today."

While he was weeding, Kaweh arrived with his food. She was happy with her husband's work.

Kaweh decided to support Aweh by singing a song.

The song encouraged Aweh to weed more. 

He was now weeding very fast, throwing the soil to his left and to his right. 

Aweh became very tired. He needed to rest.

He sat on his hoe's handle to rest. He said to Kaweh, "With you here, there is nothing that can stop me from finishing the weeding."

He challenged, "God can even come down, nothing will stop me from finishing."

Just then, Noproblem came running chasing a rabbit.

Aweh stood up and threw his hoe at the rabbit. The handle hit the ground and broke into pieces.

The rabbit was gone. The dog returned panting and gasping for breath.

Aweh and Kaweh stood without talking. The dog wagged its tail while going round them. 

Who is to blame?

------------------------------------------------------------



Hyena and Hare were friends.

Hare owned a donkey and a small red basin.

When Hare needed a big basin, he borrowed Hyena's blue basin.

Hyena wanted to wash his clothes in his basin.

Hyena went to Hare. "I need my big basin," he said.

"Your basin had a baby," said Hare. Hyena took both basins.

Another day,  Hare borrowed Hyena's basin again.

When Hyena went to get his basin, Hare had bad news.

"Your basin died," said Hare. Hyena could not believe this.

Hyena called the big animals to decide the truth.

"Things that live and give birth, also die," explained Hare.

The animals agreed with Hare. Hyena lost his basin to Hare.

------------------------------------------------------------



Hare was out looking for food. He met Elephant, who had a pot of honey.

Hare asked Elephant, "Please be kind and carry me. I am weak."

Elephant carried Hare. Hare got onto Elephant's back and held on tightly.

He started eating Elephant's honey straight away!

Honey began dripping on Elephant's back.

When Elephant asked what it was, Hare said that it was from his wound.

They reached a river and found a large buffalo drinking water.

Hare wanted to know who was stronger, Buffalo or Elephant.

They began arguing.

Elephant said she was stronger and Buffalo said she was stronger.

Hare said he had an idea how to find out who was stronger.

He asked them to wait for him there.

Hare came back with a long rope.

He tied the one end around Elephant's waist and led her away from the river.

Hare tied the other end of the rope around Buffalo's waist and left her near the river.

Hare ran and hid himself in a tree.

He shouted, "Ready! One, two, three! Pull!"

Buffalo and Elephant pulled.

Elephant pulled Buffalo.

Buffalo pulled Elephant.

Neither could win.

From where he was hiding, Hare continued to eat Elephant's honey.

After he had finished the honey, he cut the rope closer to Buffalo.

Elephant fell over hard and hit a tree.

Hare went to Buffalo and praised her, saying that she was stronger.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a far land there lived two good friends, Lion and Antelope.

They grew crops and sold their produce to traders across the nearby river.

They also had jewelry, hoes, rakes and fertilizers. Although they respected each other, they occasionally disagreed. 

However, they knew how to solve their issues.

Every morning, they visited their farm to plough and harvest their crops. 

In the evening they sat outside their house narrating stories and riddles.

They took turns to cook. Today, it was Antelope's duty. She boiled potatoes, meat and cabbages while Lion went to fetch water. 

Antelope tasted the food and it was very delicious. She decided to eat it all.

Lion brought the water home. "My friend, where is my food?"

"Wait, I will serve you right now," replied Antelope. 

She then narrated a story to distract Lion. Lion was not fooled. He was getting angry.

"When are you going to serve me my food!" Lion asked. Antelope sensed danger as she knew his friend's mood. 

"Be patient, it's coming right away," said Antelope. "Where is it!" Lion asked again angrily.

Lion moved towards the cooking place and opened the pot. There was nothing inside. 

Antelope looked around the house searching for an escape point.

Antelope dashed out of the house and ran towards the forest. Since that time they became enemies. 

Antelope still owes Lion a meal. Whenever Antelope sees Lion, she runs away very fast.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Ndalo.

Ndalo likes to read books.

This is Pendo.

Pendo likes to eat carrots.

Ndalo grazes Pendo after school.

He gives fresh water to Pendo.

Father gives grain to Pendo.

He milks Pendo every day.

Pendo gives a lot of milk.

Father sells Pendo's milk.

Ndalo drinks fresh milk every day.

He says,  "Thank you Pendo!"

------------------------------------------------------------



In a small village called Chipande, there lived a group of friends. They loved to explore and play together. 

Among them was a brave and curious young boy named Thandizo.

Thandizo was worried about what had recently happened. The terrible Cyclone Freddy had struck their neighbouring village, Nazinomwe.

It had caused landslides and flooding, leaving many people in need of help.

He wondered how families were coping. Was there anything he could do to make a difference?

Thandizo gathered his friends: Chisoni, Chibale, and Umodzi, and shared his idea.

"Let's organise a fundraiser to help the people affected by Cyclone Freddy," Thandizo exclaimed, his eyes shining with determination.

The following week, they went from door to door in Chipande village, spreading the word about their fundraising event.

The villagers were touched by the children's initiative and quickly offered their support.

The children's hard work paid off.

They managed to raise a considerable amount of money.

With the funds they collected, the children purchased  blankets, clean water, and medical aid for the affected families.

They coordinated with an aid organization to help them.

Their story inspired others to lend a helping hand. Soon neighbouring villages joined in their cause. 

Together, they formed a strong network of support, working tirelessly to rebuild the affected families.

The story of Cyclone Freddy became one of resilience, hope, and the triumph of humanity.

The children of Chipande village taught us that even in the darkest of times, a single act of kindness can change life.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a young girl in the village of Pitiko. Her name was Inna. 

Inna was famous for her skills in battles.

The King knew Inna's skills.

He summoned her whenever there was war.

Inna was a brave girl leading thousands of men to war.

One day, Inna traveled.

The people of Pitiko village were attacked while they slept. Their homes were razed down. 

Many men fled naked. The invaders took many women and children as slaves.

When Inna returned, she wept on seeing her village burned down. 

All the men had fled and were hiding in the forest across the river. Inna crossed to the forest and met them.

Inna gathered all the warriors of the village.

She led them to pursue the invaders to free her people who had been captured.

The King was so pleased with Inna when she returned with all the captives alive.

Several years later, the King died.

All the people of Pitiko village assembled. They crowned Inna as their Queen.

All the men respected her.

------------------------------------------------------------



Who are you?

Is that goo? Eeuw! I want some too.

We are two. How old are you? Six hundred and thirty two?

I like blue. Do you too?

I choose two shoes. Which do you choose?

Horseshoes?

I make toys with boys.

We make lots of noise. Whaaa!

Eurgghhh. Aargh!

I take a nap on Gogo's back.

I don't nap!

I stay upright all.

Through the night.

The ball goes THWOCK! Buddy,  you ROCK!

That's what we do. How about you?

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a farmer and his wife who had one child. 

Their child was a boy called Kisirusiru, which means, one who behaves foolishly.

One day, as Kisirusiru took the goats out, a goat's horn tore his shirt. 

His mother sent him to the shop to buy a needle so that she could mend his shirt. 

Kisirusiru bought the needle and put it in the pocket of his shirt.

On his way home, he joined the boys who were playing football. The needle fell out and got lost. 

When he reached home he told his mother what had happened. "My child," said his mother, "next time put the needle in a piece of paper." 

"Yes mother, I understand," replied Kisirusiru.

The next day, the boy picked up a pot to go and fetch water. After he had filled the pot he remembered what his mother said. So he wrapped the pot in a piece of paper to carry it home. 

But on the way, the paper got torn. The pot fell and broke into pieces, spilling all the water.

When he got home, his mother patiently explained, "My child, next time put the pot on your head. Then you'll be able to carry it without spilling." 

"Yes mother, I understand," said Kisirusiru. 

The following day, Kisirusiru's father told him to take the goats out to graze. He remembered what his mother had said, and put the goat on his head.

The goat kicked and scratched Kisirusiru's head. Soon blood was trickling down his face. 

"When will you stop your stupidity?" shouted his father. "Goats are tied and pulled with ropes! Behave properly or you'll have to leave my house."

The next day, the man sent his son to buy meat at the market. Remembering what his father said, Kisirusiru tied a rope around the meat. 

He pulled it home. He ran very fast so he did not to keep his father waiting. Imagine how the meat looked when it reached home!

His father was so angry that he told Kisirusiru to pack his things and leave. When his mother heard this, she decided to leave with her son. 

They took the kitchen door with them, so that they would have something to start building a new house.

They had walked for quite a while but could not find anywhere to build their new house. 

When it became dark, they decided to climb up a tree to sleep. They pulled up the door and their belongings with them.

After climbing the tree, they heard noises from below. They saw three dangerous men with sacks.  

Kisirusiru and his mother were so scared that their door dropped to the ground. 

The men got such a fright that they ran away, leaving the sacks behind.

Kisirusiru and his mother climbed down the tree. They opened the men's sacks. Inside they found money, clothes, blankets, and other things they needed to set up house. 

They soon found a place to build themselves a new house. They lived happily ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a man and his wife. They had six boys and one girl. 

The girl's name was Natabo. The parents loved Natabo more than they loved her brothers.

The parents gave a small pot as a gift to their daughter. 

Natabo loved that little pot. She loved to play with it.

One day, by accident, the boys broke Natabo's pot. It broke into small pieces. 

The brothers did not know what to do. They threw the pieces into the bush.

Natabo looked for her pot but did not find it. She got very upset and cried. She refused to eat anything. 

She begged her parents and brothers to find the pot, but they could not.

Natabo became even more upset. She ran away and went to the forest. 

She climbed up the tallest tree in the forest.

Natabo's parents searched for their daughter. 

They found her, and asked her to climb down. But she refused. They told her to come down, but she still refused.

Natabo's brothers gathered and sang a song to ask her to come down. 

This is the song: "Our last born, come down and we can go home. We shall get a new pot!"

Natabo made fun of her brothers. 

She sang the same song, but imitating the boys,  "Ninini-ninio, ninini-ninio. Ninini-ninio, ninini-ninio!"

Natabo's friend came and tried to coax her to climb down. 

She sang, "My friend, come down and we will go home. We shall get a new pot!"

Gradually, Natabo began to climb down the tree. 

Her friend continued to sing until Natabo reached the ground.

Natabo hugged her friend. 

They walked slowly back to Natabo's home.

Natabo's brothers and parents were joyful when the girls returned. The family had a party, with many friends and relatives. 

And Natabo was happy with her new pot.

------------------------------------------------------------



Today I went to the zoo.

I saw a lot. I saw a lion.

I saw an elephant.

I saw a crocodile.

I saw giraffes.

I saw a lot of zebras.

I even saw a cow.

It was a lot of fun. But then Daddy drove us home.

------------------------------------------------------------



There once lived a man with a lot of livestock. He kept goats, camels, cows and donkeys. 

The man was married to a beautiful woman.

For a long time, the man and his wife did not have a baby. Then the woman gave birth to a beautiful girl. 

They named the baby Muurui. The man was happy and proud.

The woman was very busy. She left her baby alone in the hut and went to milk cows. 

The baby's gourd of milk was also in the hut.

When the baby was alone in the hut, she would wake up. 

She would drink all of the milk, and begin to cry. Her mother would run home to nurse her.

The woman always found the gourd empty. 

This was surprising! Who drank the milk?

The woman shared this problem with her husband. 

He decided to find out what happened to the milk.

The man hid in the hut when his wife went out. 

To his surprise, the baby got up and drank the milk!  It was unbelievable.

The man told his wife what he saw and they decided to leave. 

They went at night, when the baby was asleep. They left their home.

And so, the magic baby was abandoned by her parents. They left her a goat, a cow and a camel. 

When Muurui awoke, she found the compound was quiet. She was all alone.

She felt angry. She killed the goat and the camel. 

Then she decided to hide inside the cow's stomach.

While Muurui's cow was grazing, a man passed by and saw it. 

He said, "I will slaughter this cow for beef." He speared the cow.

As this man was skinning the cow, he heard a voice say,  "Do not harm me, I am in the cow's stomach!"

Muurui then grabbed the man's head. 

He got such a fright that he ran away. He left the cow.

When the man got home,  he slaughtered a fat ram. He cooked the meat and took it to the magic baby.

Muurui ate and was happy. The magic baby disappeared into the night.

------------------------------------------------------------



Abike was lying down on her mat. She was listening to her mother telling her one of her favourite stories.

The story was about the women of their village, who are known for making beautiful mats and baskets.

Abike's most precious gift was the sleeping mat her grandmother made for her 10th birthday.

When Abike got up, her mother wanted to put away the mat. "Not yet Ma, let's look at the colours and shapes together," Abike asked. 

Abike named the colours of the rows, from top to bottom, "Pink, pink, green, green, blue, blue, pink, pink, green, green." 

Can you see where the pattern changes on the mat?

Abike stretched out the mat. Most of the shapes were rectangles, with some squares as well. "I know a quick way to work out how many shapes there are altogether," said Abike. "You don't count each shape, you only count the number of shapes in a row." 

Do you know how Abike counts the shapes? 

How many shapes altogether?

Abike had another smaller mat that she used to sit outside on the ground.

This mat had only rectangles. About how many of the rectangles is Abike covering with her body? About how many rectangles are not covered?

Can you use Abike's quick way to work out how many rectangles the mat has altogether?

One morning Abike went to visit her grandmother. At the well she saw women fetching water in buckets they were carrying on their heads.

She wondered how many litres of water each bucket  holds. What do you think?

Abike arrived at her grandmother's house. "What a lovely surprise Abike! Look at this new basket I made. Do you like it?" Grandma asked.

"I like the colours, but the shapes are too sharp and pointed," replied Abike.

How would you copy the pattern on the basket?

Are the shapes like a square or a rectangle or another shape?

On her way home, Abike lost the path. She wasn't sure where she was, so she sat down to rest under a  tree.

Abike stared at the leaves dancing on the branches above. There were patterns of light and shade all around her. Soon she fell into a deep sleep.

When she woke up, she felt afraid. She wanted to be at home with her mother, resting on her mat. 

Just then a small, blue bird landed in the tree. "Hello, don't worry, I can help you get home. Follow me," it chirped. 

Abike was surprised to hear a bird talking.

Abike followed the bird easily until they came to a fork in the path. The path split into two different directions, one to the left and one to the right. Which path should she take?

Abike looked up. Was it possible? The bird had a piece of her mat in its beak! 

It flew over the path on the right-hand side and dropped the piece of mat. Then the bird flew away.

Abike followed the path down the hill.

She heard the laughter and singing of the people of her village. Abike was happy to be home safely.

Abike's mother rolled out her mat and gave her a bowl of food to eat.

Abike began counting the squares just to make sure they were still all there. While she was counting she was sure she saw a piece of the mat that had been taken out and put back again.

So, she was not dreaming. The small, blue bird was real after all!

------------------------------------------------------------



I live in Kakuma village, a very hot dry place, full of thorny trees, and more goats than people. 

Even the market place is quiet, with only a few small shops. Most people use bicycles for transport.

One morning, Mother called me and said, "Etabo, today you turn six years old. We have a present for you." 

"What is it? What is it?" I asked eagerly. "Tomorrow we're going by bus to the market in Eldoret. You're coming with us!" she replied. 

My first visit to the city! I was so excited that I could hardly sleep that night.

The next day at the Kakuma bus stop, I stood between Mother and my aunt. I wore my new pair of blue jeans and a red T-shirt. 

I felt very small between my tall slender Mother and my big round aunt.

The bus was very full, so I had to sit on Mother's lap. 

Tired from the heat and excitement, I slept the whole way and saw nothing.

The sun was just rising when we reached Eldoret market. At the entrance was a woman selling grains. Over in one corner there were two men getting ready to lay out their sweet potatoes. 

Over in another corner was a woman holding a shiny blue helicopter. "Mother, mother, look at that helicopter!" But Mother pulled me away.

In the middle of the market, there was a large stall that sold different types of fruit. Some of them I had never seen before. 

"What are the names of these fruits?" I asked Mother. 

She pointed, "These are oranges, and these are guavas." I turned around and said, "And these?"

Of all the fruits at the stall, I liked the apples most. I liked their shape and colour. I wondered how they tasted. 

I turned to Mother and said, "Could you buy one for me?"

As soon as she gave me the apple, I let go of Mother's hand, took the fruit with both hands, and bit into the juicy flesh. 

I had never enjoyed a fruit the way I enjoyed that apple. All I cared about was my apple.

When I finished the apple, I looked up to talk to Mother. But she was not there! Mother and aunt had gone. 

I looked to the right, then to the left. But they were nowhere to be seen. 

"Have you seen my mother?" I asked the women selling potatoes nearby. They took no notice. I started to cry.

A while later, a woman took me by the hand and led me to a place where there were other children. 

A big man with a thick beard asked, "What's your name, boy?" 

"E-ta-bo," I replied through my tears.

I wondered if children were also sold at the market. I stopped crying and looked around to see if anyone would buy the children in the room. 

Soon a woman came in and picked up one of the children. "I will be the next one to be taken away," I thought. "And then I'll never see home again!" I started crying once more.

When I heard the big man with the thick beard saying, "Where is Etabo?" I cried even harder. 

"I do not want to go with you!" I sobbed. I hid away from him.

When Mother and aunt heard my name, they rushed to the room. 

"Etabo, Etabo!" a familiar voice called. It was Mother.

As I got up to hug Mother, my aunt said, "Etabo,  we were looking for you to give you your birthday present." 

And from a big bag, my aunt pulled out a shiny blue helicopter. "It's yours!" she said.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, Fox and God were friends. One day, they went to look for cows at a village far away from home. Fox said to his friend, "We should take water with us." 

God said, "No, we will get water there."

On their way, Fox was thirsty. He said, "God, I want water. I am thirsty." 

God replied, "Pull out those grasses next to the road, you will get water." Fox pulled out the grasses and water came from the ground. They drank.

They reached the village and went to the cattle camp. They took two cows, tied them with ropes, and quickly left.

But the cattle owners saw them and ran after them. Fox cried, "God, people are coming after us. They will catch us!"

As the people approached, Fox became more worried. "God! People are coming closer," cried Fox. "Don't worry," God responded.

When the cattle owners were very close, Fox cried out, "Help, God! They will catch us now!"

God said, "Hold my toe and the rope of your cow." Fox did so. God put his forehead on the ground, and the earth opened up. God dived into the ground with his cow, and Fox followed. 

The earth closed behind them. They came up in their village.

The next day, Fox called his friend, Vulture. Fox said, "My friend! Let's go and look for cows."

Vulture agreed and said, "We should take water with us." Fox replied, "We will get water on the way." 

They left home for the same cattle camp as the day before.

On their way, they both began to feel thirsty. They reached the same spot next to the grasses. "I am very thirsty," complained Vulture.

Fox said to Vulture. "Pull out those grasses, you will find water."

Vulture pulled out the grasses, but there was no water. Fox pulled out more grasses, but still there was no water.

So, they had to look for water in other places.

Fox and Vulture finally reached the cattle camp and took two cows. The cattle owners saw them and ran after them. 

Vulture saw the people following them with sticks. He said "Fox! People are coming." "Don't be afraid," replied Fox.

The cattle owners got closer. Vulture cried, "Fox! People will catch us now!"

Fox said, "Hold my toe and the rope of your cow." Vulture did so.

Fox placed his head on the ground to open it. But the ground didn't open up. Fox tried many times, but nothing happened.

"Let go of my toe!" Fox shouted at Vulture. Fox ran away, leaving Vulture with the two cows.

The cattle owners caught Vulture and beat him. Vulture was so frightened that all his feathers fell out. Eventually, most of the vulture's feathers grew back, but not all of them.

Until today, this is the reason that vultures are bald on their heads and necks.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time there was a husband and wife with children. 

The mother prepared food for the family each day. She would bring the meal to the table for them to eat.

The father would divide the meat. 

He would say to the eldest child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older."

Then he would say to the next child, "I am old enough for meat. Here is yours. Wait until you are older." 

Each small portion became even smaller.  It went like this for all the children. The youngest child got a tiny piece of meat.

The father kept the big pieces of meat for himself and his wife. 

The children were quiet and ate their food.

Years passed and the children grew up. The parents grew old. They became weak. 

The children looked after their old mother and father.

One day at meal time, the eldest child served the meat,  as usual. 

But this time she gave only a tiny piece to her father and a tiny piece to her mother.

She said to her parents, "You ate yours, now it is our time. We are old enough."  

She served most of the meat to her brothers and sisters.

The father remembered what he did while his children were young. Mother and father agreed that it was not the right thing to do. 

They asked for forgiveness. The children promised that they would not repeat this mistake with their own children.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, in the village of Elunyiko, there lived a man called Ndonga and his wife called Namukhaywa. 

They had six children. All of them were girls.

When Namukhaywa was pregnant with her seventh child, Ndonga warned her.

He said, "If you give birth to another girl, I will leave you. But if you give me a baby boy, I will hold a big party for you!"

When it was time to give birth, Namukhaywa went to the traditional midwife. 

Would the child be a girl or a boy?

It was a boy AND a girl – twins! She called the boy Mukhwana, and the girl she called Mulongo. As she looked at Mukhwana, she was very happy. 

But as she looked at Mulongo, she felt sad. She felt that there was only one thing she could do.

Namukhaywa left Mulongo in the care of the midwife and took Mukhwana home to her husband.

She proudly showed Ndonga the baby boy. 

He was very happy and called all the villagers to celebrate the birth of his son.

Mukhwana grew up to be a fine young man. 

And Mulongo grew up to be a fine young woman.

One day, while minding his father's cattle, Mukhwana saw a very beautiful girl. 

"This is the girl I want to marry," he said to himself.

But when he asked her to marry him, she sang this song: 

Mukhwana wefwe, Mukhwana. 
So yakhupa omunwa, Mukhwana. 
Nebebula omukhana, Mukhwana. 
Barulaka khulwanda, Mukhwana. 
Nebebula omusiani, Mukhwana. 
Barera mungo muno, Mukhwana. 
Iyeyi yakwa, Mukhwana. 
Iyindi yakwa, Mukhwana.

This happened again and again. Mukhwana did not know what to do. 

He went to his mother, Namukhaywa. "I have found a beautiful girl," he said. "And I want to marry her. But every time I ask her, she sings the same song."

To his surprise, Namukhaywa said, "What the girl is singing about is true. That is your sister. You were born twins.

Your father wanted a son, not a daughter. So I left your baby sister with the midwife, and brought you home to your father."

When Mukhwana told his father the story, he saw that he had been wrong. 

He called Namukhaywa and together they went to the midwife to fetch Mulongo.

When Mulongo arrived home, her father and the village elders slaughtered a goat.

They performed the traditional ceremony for re-uniting Mulongo and her seven siblings.

A year later, Mulongo was married to the son of the rich king of that village. 

She brought a lot of wealth and happiness to her family.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mrs Deng has four daughters. They are at high school and university. 

She is very proud of her daughters. She likes to tell them about her life growing up as a girl.

"In traditional Nuer culture, when a girl reaches the age of ten, she is usually given household chores. The chores include grinding, cooking, collecting firewood, and even milking cows," says Mrs Deng.

"These are the chores that a girl knows she should do from morning to evening. The mother of a girl must make sure that her daughter knows this work."

"These practices show that a girl is respectful, able to work, and has been taught well by her mother. A married woman must be able to manage her household."

"If a girl does not know how to do these chores, it is hard for her to get married because she would not be able to manage her household."

"These are the duties of a girl in traditional Nuer culture," says Mrs Deng to her daughters. 

"I have taught you well, you are ready for marriage."

Mrs Deng concludes, "But first, you will complete your education, my daughters. That is my duty to you and your duty to yourselves."

"And find husbands who are respectful, able to work, and have been taught well by their parents," adds Mrs Deng with a smile. 

"Yes, mom, we know!" say her daughters as they hug their mother.

------------------------------------------------------------



Namu and her brother are ready for school.

Namu carries her brother on her bicycle.

Their friends cheer for them as they ride into school.

While they are in the classroom, a monkey arrives outside.

The monkey rides away on Namu's bicycle!

The children chase the monkey.

The monkey leaves the bicycle under a tree.

The monkey swims to an island in the middle of the lake.

He climbs high into a tree.

The monkey waves goodbye! The children wave back.

Namu has her bicycle again.

------------------------------------------------------------



All of my buttons are circles.

Some of my buttons are green.

All of my buttons are small.

Some of my buttons are yellow.

All of my buttons are nice.

Some of my buttons are red.

All of my buttons are shiny.

Some of my buttons are blue.

All of my buttons are good.

I like all my buttons.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ball.

My ball.

My red ball.

My big red ball.

I kick.

I kick my ball.

I kick my red ball.

I kick my red ball hard!

Where?

Where is my ball?

Where is my ball now?

Where is my red ball now?

It is up.

It is high up.

It is high up in the sky.

It is high up in the sky. 

It is over the moon. It is gone!

------------------------------------------------------------















------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Pa Nase the spider felt very hungry. He decided to go in search of food. 

He visited his friend's place where he usually got help. But his friend was not at home.

Hungry Pa Nase thought of an idea for getting food. 

He remembered the store where the village women usually kept food.

He sneaked into the store and stole some fish and bananas.

On his way out, the little children noticed his unusual movements. They called on one of the women. 

The women rushed at Pa Nase.

With loaded pockets, Pa Nase was very afraid and wanted to run. 

The women caught him and decided to punish him.

"Let us grind him on the village stone," Yalol, one of the women suggested.

Pa Nase laughed out loud and said, "My grandfather lives in this rock. Grinding me on it is like sending me home. Thank you!" 

The women decided not to grind him.

"Let us throw him in the fire," said Yangbet. 

Again, Pa Nase laughed and said, "My grandmother, who loved me so much, is the owner of all fires. Throwing me into fire is like sending me home. Thank you!" The women felt disappointed.

"Let us fill a basket with fruit, put him inside and throw it into the river" Yabana suggested. At this, Pa Nase cried, "You have finally killed me!" 

The women were happy. They filled a basket with fruit, put him inside and threw it into the river.

Once in the middle of the river, Pa Nase celebrated. 

He took some fruit and ate as he laughed at the women.

The women felt tricked and tried to hook Pa Nase. 

But the fast flowing river did not allow them to catch him.

Pa Nase forgot that there was fishing net down the river. He was caught in the net and got trapped. 

Nobody came to help him.

------------------------------------------------------------



Pensa was the best hunter in the whole Kalahari Desert. He brought home fat animals and fed his family well. 

There was this bird, the Pam-Pam bird, which Pensa wanted to catch. The bird's tail feathers were perfect for his arrows. The problem was, he could never manage to trap or shoot Pam-Pam. 

Pensa's arrows would fly through the air just like a bird - if only he could catch Pam-Pam and pull out his tail feathers!

Pensa went to the wise man, their healer. He asked for help. "Please guide me to catch the Pam-Pam bird. I need his feathers for my bow and arrows. What must I do to catch him?" 

The healer replied, "Go and make a fire. When all the insects run away from your fire, you must catch the smallest of them. Make a trap and place this little insect inside your trap. It will tempt the Pam-Pam bird."

Pensa did not know that the healer and the Pam-Pam bird were friends. Pam-Pam often visited the healer. They exchanged stories. 

"I warn you," said the healer when Pam-Pam bird visited him. "I have told the hunter how to catch you. When you see a fire in the veld, you must fly far away. I want to see which one of you will win."

In the meantime, Pensa started his hunt for the Pam-Pam bird. He sat in the veld and rubbed and rubbed his fire sticks. 

When the smoke appeared, he blew into the fine grass around his fire sticks, until the little flame appeared and became a fire. 

The insects around the flaming grass flew away, but Pensa managed to catch a young grasshopper. He put it into his trap.

The Pam-Pam bird could not resist the juicy young grasshopper in Pensa's trap. He decided to fly down and grab it quickly with his sharp beak. 

Pensa heard Pam-Pam bird's cry, "Pam-pam, pam-pam, pam-pam." 

Pensa ran to his trap. The bird was trapped!

Pam-Pam bird begged Pensa to set him free. 

"Oh no," said Pensa, "I have wanted to catch you for a very long time. Today you are mine! Your feathers will make my arrow fly through the air, just like you."

Pam-Pam bird screeched, "If you kill me you will have no more feathers for your arrow when these are worn out, because I will be dead. Set me free and I promise to give you new feathers with each full moon."

Pensa let Pam-Pam go. 

AS Pam-Pam walked away, he thought, "Am I really free?"

Pensa went home and made new arrows. 

When the people saw his new arrows, they exclaimed, "O-o, look at this hunter! He carries the Pam-Pam bird's feathers in his arrows. Now he will hunt well and bring us good food. We shall have a feast!"

That night, the healer led the people in a fire dance to celebrate the hunter's success and Pam-Pam bird's freedom. 

And since that day, all the good hunters remember the story of the Pam-Pam bird, to tell their children as a memory of days gone by.

Story notes In 1998! Xun storyteller Pensa Limungu (1949 – 2007) sung this oral tale, accompanied by the traditional Khonga, to Marlene Winberg who translated it with the help of Kapilolo Mahongo. It talks about the relationship between nature and people, the hunter and the hunted. It teaches the audience how the hunter is dependent on nature's resources and may not waste it. The illustrations in this story are from story boards by Marlene Winberg, interpreted digitally by Satsiri Winberg through manipulations of the Manyeka Art Collection of paintings made by San artists.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Natabo.

She has six brothers.

Her parents give her a small pot.

She loves it.

One day her brothers break the pot.

Natabo cannot find her pot. 

She cries and cries.

Natabo runs away.

She climbs a tall tree.

Her parents find her.

"Please come down," they ask.

Her brothers sing,  "Please come down."

Natabo makes fun of their song.

Then Natabo's friend comes.

"Please come down," she sings.

Natabo's friend sings until she comes down from the tree.

The friends walk home together.

Everyone celebrates that Natabo is home.

Natabo gets a new pot!

------------------------------------------------------------



Cracked brown wood.

Painted brown lion.

Soft brown bread.

Yummy brown cakes.

Old brown boots.

Shiny brown buffalo.

Woolly brown hat.

Smooth brown dog.

Dirty brown mud.

Wet brown skin.

And what is this? A clean face in a dirty mirror.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a little farm near a little village.

There lived a little chicken called Daisy.

"When I grow up, I want to fly high, high into the sky," Daisy said.

But all the other chickens laughed at her.

"You are so weird," they said. "We won't play with you anymore."

"Daisy, we can all flap our wings but it's very difficult for chickens to fly," Mama told her.

Daisy wouldn't give up.

Every day she practiced by herself, flapping her wings. 

Flap, flap, flap, she would flap her wings but she couldn't lift off the ground. She imagined herself flying high into the sky.

She imagined herself flying high and looking at the chickens below. 

She imagined flying past the sparrows and the swallows. "Wow! A chicken that can fly!" The birds would say.

So Flap, flap, flap, every day Daisy would flap her wings.

She would lift off the ground but fall down again.

"I'm never going to fly!" Daisy cried to Mama. "The others are right."

"Daisy, you are different from the other chickens. They don't want to fly but you do! You can do it," Mama said.

The following day Daisy climbed to the top of the chicken coop and flap, flap, flap, she flapped her wings. 

She flew into the air and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and ...

BAM!

The other chickens laughed out loud. 

"Ha ha ha! We told you! Chickens can't fly!"

But the next day Daisy climbed even higher, right up to the top of the hut. 

Flap, flap, flap, Daisy flapped her wings.

She flew into the air and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and flapped her wings and...

She kept flying! The wind beneath her wings grew stronger and she flew higher and higher! 

The sparrows and the swallows said, "Amazing! A flying chicken!"

And the other chickens wanted to be just like her.

They said, "Oh Daisy, you're amazing!"

------------------------------------------------------------



It was a hot summer day in the dry forest.

Little Ant had no water for many days.

"I need a drop of water, even if it falls from a leaf," cried Little Ant.

But even the dew had dried up.

"If I do not have water, I will die," cried Little Ant. "I must go to the river I heard about."

"The river is full and strong. It will sweep you away," warned a wise squirrel.

But Little Ant was extremely thirsty. "I will die if I don't drink some water."

So, he went to look for the river.

He walked past tufts of grass and over dry branches.

He walked until he heard water splashing. 

It was the river! He could hear waves.

Little Ant took a long sip of cool water.

He was so happy he did not see a wave coming.

Little Ant tried to grab some grass floating past him. 

But he was swept away by the water.

"Help me someone. Help me please!" he called.

"Quick, climb on," said White Dove, holding a branch in her beak.

White Dove saved Little Ant from drowning in the river.

"I will stay here until I can thank the dove," decided Little Ant. 

"I will wait until she comes back to drink."

One day as he waited, two boys came to the river. 

They had their slingshots.

"There is a big white dove that comes here to drink," said one boy.

"Let's kill it and have it for supper tonight," said the other boy.

"I cannot let the boys kill White Dove," thought Little Ant. "But I am so tiny, what can I do?"

Just then White Dove flew down from the tree to drink.

The naughty boys got ready to shoot White Dove.

Little Ant had an idea.

Little Ant jumped onto one boy's foot. 

He bit that boy as hard as he could.

The boy jumped. "Ouch!" he shouted.

White Dove was startled and flew away to safety.

That was how Little Ant thanked White Dove for saving him.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long, long, time ago, all the animals could talk.

Mother Mosquito and Baby Mosquito lived in a house.

Mother Mosquito always left Baby Mosquito at home when she went to search for food.

One day, after Mother left the house, Baby Mosquito wanted to go outside.

When Mother Mosquito came back later, she found that her child had gone out.

Mother Mosquito was worried. Baby Mosquito was out all alone.

But just then, Baby Mosquito returned home.

Baby Mosquito was very excited. 

"Mummy, the humans were happy to see me. They clapped their hands every time I flew past!"

Mother Mosquito was alarmed.

"You say that people were happy and clapping their hands for you?" she asked her child.

"They were not happy to see you. They were trying to squash you!" explained Mother.

"Humans are never happy to see mosquitoes," she warned.

------------------------------------------------------------



Prosy wanted a pussy cat.

Prosy's family went to visit the pussy cats.

Prosy wanted this cat. It was too big for her.

Tim wanted this kitten. It was too small for him.

Mum wanted this kitten. It was too quick for her.

Everyone liked this kitten.

They took the kitten.

Everyone is happy with the new pussy cat.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, a lion, a fox, an ape and a hyena lived together.

The ape and the hyena plotted to harm the fox. 

They secretly went to meet the lion.

"Lion, you are much respected, but why don't you have shoes?" the ape asked the lion.

"You are right. Who can make shoes for me?" asked the lion.

"The fox can make shoes for you," replied the hyena.

"Call the fox," said the lion.

The fox came, and the lion told her to make shoes for him.

"The best shoes are made from the skins of apes and hyenas," whispered the fox.

"I want the finest shoes," said the lion.

So he killed the hyena and the ape. He gave their skins to the fox.

The fox was worried that the lion would kill her if she did not make the shoes.

She put the skins into the river.

The lion became impatient. "Where are my shoes?" he growled.

Fox replied, "I am still waiting for the skins to soften."

The next morning, the fox came running from the river.

She told the lion, "Someone just like you is guarding the skins. I can't get them!"

The lion rushed to the river. He saw his own reflection in the water, and jumped in to fight!

The lion drowned, leaving the fox alone.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once a upon a time, all  the animals could talk. 

They lived together with people in a town called Babianeha.

The people and animals worked happily together at Babianeha. 

They worked very hard on a big farm.

One day, the Elephant called all the animals and the people of Babianeha.

He spoke, "My brothers and sisters, I want to tell you something."

Rabbit asked, "What do you want to share with us?"

Elephant said, "Brothers and sisters, Babianeha is now a very big town."

Elephant continued, "We need a king, and l want to be that king. I am big and very strong. Nobody is bigger than me. I have to be the King of Babianeha."

All the animals and people shouted at Elephant, "No! No! No! You cannot be our king. We need a wise king, not a big, wrong king."

They agreed to hold a vote. 

After the voting, Lion won and became the King of the forest.

------------------------------------------------------------



Oscar is a little goat. He lives on a farm. He is very brave and adventurous. 

In his herd there are 20 goats, including Oscar.

A herd of 20 cattle live next to the goats. Oscar's best friend is a cow called Shola. 

One day, Oscar and Shola decide to make friendship bracelets. "Let us make a bracelet for everyone," says Shola.

"The bracelets will be a sign of our friendship," agrees Oscar.

Oscar and Shola divide the work of making bracelets equally. They each make 20 bracelets. 

Each bracelet has 1 piece of red wool and 1 piece of blue wool. How many pieces of red and blue wool did they use altogether?

Everyone loves the friendship bracelets. The 40 friends are happy together. 

Then, suddenly, the cattle disappear! Nobody knows what happened. Only half of the animals remain.

Oscar decides to search for Shola and the rest of her herd.

Oscar sets off on his journey.

He comes to a gap in the ground. The gap is too wide to jump over. It is 1 meter wide. 

He finds some branches that he can use as a bridge. The branches are 150 centimeters long.  Will they be long enough?

Oscar lays the branches next to each other, and walks across the gap. 

He is relieved when he reaches the other side! 

He continues to walk and walk. The day is hot and he becomes very thirsty.

Oscar searches for water. He finally sees a river and rushes over to it.

The rocks are slippery and Oscar slips and slides! He falls onto a big rock just above the water. 

He nearly slips into the river.

There is a huge crocodile in the river below! 

Oscar screams for help. He screams until he sees someone coming. It is a cow. 

The cow shouts, "I will fetch a rope and some friends to help you!"

When the cow returns, she throws a rope and Oscar just manages to catch it. The rope is made of pieces of colourful wool. 

The rope is a little too short. Oscar ties his friendship bracelet to the end of the rope. Now it is long enough.

"Hold on tight and we will pull you up," says the cow. Oscar is soon on the river bank. 

He goes to thank the other cattle and sees his best friend! They are overjoyed and hug each other.

Oscar has many questions about what happened.

"We wondered away from the farm. We were grazing and a wild dog chased us. We ran for our lives!" says Shola. 

"We ran so fast and so far that we could not find our way back to the farm. We missed you all!" she adds.

Oscar, Shola, and 19 cattle return to the farm.

The 19 goats are overjoyed and all the friends are reunited.

They are a group of 40 friends again.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time there was a poor couple who had only one child, called Nonkungu. They loved her very much. 

When she was old enough,  her parents decided to send Nonkungu to stay with her rich Uncle Mtonyama. 

Nonkungu's mother made special clothes with ribbon,  buttons and beads. Then Nonkungu set off for her uncle's village.

On her journey,  Nonkungu came to a stream. She crossed the stream and met a girl wearing rags. The girl asked, "Where are you going?" Nonkungu replied, "I'm going to visit my Uncle Mtonyama." 

"Well,  Mtonyama is my uncle,  too! I am also on my way to visit him," said the girl. They set off together. After a while, the girl said to Nonkungu,  "Your clothes are lovely. Please let me try them on."

Nonkungu took off her clothes and gave them to the girl. When the girl took off her rags,  Nonkungu saw that she had a tail! Nonkungu was afraid. 

She realised that the girl was really an imbulu. 

They walked a little further,  and then Nonkungu asked,  "Please give me back my clothes and beads."

The imbulu answered,  "Let me wear them until we get to the next tree." She pointed to a tree on a hill nearby. 

When they reached the tree, Nonkungu asked, "Please give me back my clothes and beads." 

The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that field." She pointed to a field on the next hill.

At last they reached the field. Again Nonkungu asked the imbulu,  "Please give me back my clothes and my beads." 

The imbulu replied, "Just let me wear them until we get to that hut where the women are sitting." She pointed to a hut in the distance. 

But when they finally got near to the hut, the imbulu pushed Nonkungu back and ran ahead.

The imbulu said to the women at the hut, "Look at this girl wearing rags. She has been following me all day. I wish she would go away." 

The women turned to look at Nonkungu. She was so frightened that she ran and hid in the kraal. The imbulu went to Uncle Mtonyama's hut.

Mtonyama and his family welcomed the imbulu, who said she was their niece. 

Poor Nonkungu continued to hide away. She sang this song: 

"Oh misery me,  misery me. I was sent to stay with my Uncle Mtonyama. On the way I met an imbulu. She took my skirt and my beads. Oh misery me,  misery me."

One day,  Mtonyama's eldest son was walking in the field and heard the sad song. He didn't know who was singing,  but when he got home,  he told his father the words. 

Mtonyama went into the fields. He heard the song,  and looked until he found Nonkungu.

Nonkungu told her uncle everything that  had happened. Mtonyama took her back to the village and hid her in a hut. He knew what he was going to do to catch the imbulu. 

Mtonyama had heard that an imbulu's tail loves milk and that it can't go past milk without drinking some. So he told his men to dig a hole and fill it with sour milk.

Then Mtonyama called all the girls of the village to take part in a jumping competition. 

The imbulu was worried. She did not want to jump over the hole, she knew that her tail would be thirsty for the sour milk. So she went into a hut and tied her tail to her body as tightly as she could. 

Then she took her place with the other girls.

One girl after another jumped over the hole with the sour milk. At last it was the imbulu's turn. 

She tried to jump high over the hole,  but her tail broke loose. The imbulu's tail pulled her down,  down,  down into the sour milk.

As the imbulu struggled in the milk,  they quickly filled the hole with sand and buried her. 

That was the end of the imbulu. Nonkungu stayed happily with her uncle for a long,  long time.

------------------------------------------------------------



In Miwa Forest,  there lived a monkey who was always sad. This was because every time she had a baby,  it died.

The pain of losing her babies made Monkey jump up and down. She would jump to one branch,  then to another,  and cry out,  "Kwi! Kwi! Kwi!"

Monkey was always sad. She was sadder when she saw other monkeys with their babies.

The sad monkey sat on a branch.  Days passed and she cried more and more.

Then she gave birth again. She decided to take the baby to the path so that people passing would see the baby and wish it well.

Monkey climbed down from the branch and put her baby on the path. At that time,  a hunter was returning home. He saw the baby monkey lying on the side of the path.

The hunter carried the baby monkey to his house. When the hunter reached home,  his three sons wanted to hold the baby monkey.

The three boys played singing,  "Throw it up! Throw it down! Throw it to me! Throw it to him!" The baby monkey was thrown from one child to the other.

As the three boys played with the baby monkey,  mother Monkey was hiding in a tree. She was watching them. She was afraid that this baby would also die,  like the others.

Then the hunter's wife came and saw her children playing with the little monkey. She said,  "Be careful! Bring it here. You will drop it!"

She took the baby monkey in her arms,  and blessed it.

The hunter's wife put the baby monkey down. Mother Monkey picked up her baby. She disappeared into the forest. From then on,  all her babies survived.

------------------------------------------------------------



In the faraway veld in Ncwadi, there was a frog who lived in the grass with her three children.

Every day, Mummy Frog went out to look for food for her family. 

Mummy Frog always warned her children, "Do not go outside while I am away!"

But the littlest frog wanted to know where her mother went to find food.

One day, while Mummy Frog was away, Little Frog went out into the world.

Little Frog met a cow. She asked, "What do you eat?" The cow mooed, "I eat hay and grass."

"Where can I find them?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the cow.

Little Frog met a pig. She asked, "What do you eat?" The pig oinked, "I eat vegetables and mealie pap." 

"Where can I find them?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the pig.

Little Frog met a cat. She asked, "What do you eat?" The cat meowed, "I eat meat."

"Where can I find it?" asked Little Frog. "Go down the road," replied the cat.

Little Frog met a snake.

"What do you eat?" she asked.

"I eat frogs," hissed the snake.

Little Frog jumped up high into the air.

She jumped as fast as she could, all the way home.

Little Frog did not look back.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ostrich and Lioness were great friends.

Both of them had young ones.

Ostrich fed her chicks well.

The cubs had little food to eat.

Lioness looked at the chicks and thought, "They are beautiful! I wish they were mine."

When Ostrich was away, Lioness took the chicks to her home.

Ostrich returned and found the cubs in her home. 

She cried, "Where are my children?"

Ostrich ran to Lioness' hut and saw her chicks with Lioness.

Lioness refused to let Ostrich take her chicks.

She said, "They are mine now. You can have the cubs."

Ostrich was angry and upset.

"What can I do to get back my children?" she wondered to herself.

Then she thought, "I know what to do. I will call all the animals for a meeting."

The animals gathered together.

Elephant asked Ostrich and Lioness to speak.

Most of the animals were afraid to blame Lioness.

Finally, Squirrel stood up and said, "Children that look like birds, belong to Ostrich. Those with tails, belong to Lioness."

Then Squirrel disappeared into a hole.

All the animals cheered.

Lioness was very annoyed.

She went home with her cubs.

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago, there was village called Tuntunganga. The people of Tuntunganga were farmers. 

In a certain year, before the maize were ripe for harvest, troops of monkeys invaded the farms.

Efforts by the villagers to ward off the animals failed. The king called the elders for a meeting. 

He announced that anyone who could save the village from famine could marry, Pheetami, the princess.

The town crier was sent out to announce the decision to the villagers. 

Many men began thinking of ways of catching the clever monkeys. But none could catch a single monkey. 

The troop caused more havoc.

Young men spent entire days chasing the monkeys. They wanted to marry the princess. 

Pheelamilo only spread his mat under a tree and relaxed.

In the evening, Pheelamilo would go to the stream to swim. 

He noticed that the monkeys always returned to the forest after destroying the farms. 

Meanwhile, the king was getting more worried.

On the third day, Pheelamilo woke up very early and went to the stream. He observed the monkeys. 

He discovered that they drank water before crossing to destroy the maize. They drank again before retiring to the forest.

The chief monkey arrived first. He drank water, ate maize and then climbed up a tree. 

The other monkeys went to the farms. The chief alerted the others if someone approached. They would all flee. He would leave last.

People were becoming more worried. 

"I will give a herd of cattle also, to whoever will drive away these monkeys," the king promised.

In the morning, Pheelamilo hid near the stream. The chief monkey sat in a tree as usual and watched out for the troop. 

Pheelamilo waited patiently until the troop left. He then scattered roast groundnuts near the stream.

The next time the chief monkey came down to drink, he started eating the groundnuts. 

He picked them until he reached a small hole with more nuts. As he reached into the hole, a rope seized his hand. 

Pheelamilo took the chief monkey home.

Pheelamilo tied up the chief monkey and shaved off his fur. 

The villagers did not know why he shaved the monkey, and they laughed at him.

As the troops were causing havoc, Pheelamilo released their chief. 

He ran to join his troops, but they fled! As he ran towards the other monkeys, they fled from him. 

The king happily fulfilled his promises. Pheetami and Pheelamilo married, with many cattle.

------------------------------------------------------------



"I have a very big problem," cried Chief Short and Round.

"I have lost my spring horn," said Chief Short and Round.

"I will find your spring horn," said Little Jojo. "I will look at Tata Rectangle's house."

Little Jojo and Tata Rectangle looked everywhere but they could not find the spring horn.

"Go and see if Mama Triangle has the spring horn," said Tata Rectangle.

Little Jojo stopped at his house to pour a glass of cold water.

Jojo visited Dudu Diamond and asked if she would go with him.

"It’s not far but I will pack some food to take with," said Dudu.

Dudu and Jojo stopped to eat and rest at the bottom of the triangle mountain.

When they were half way up the mountain, they saw a strange spider web.

Jojo and Dudu arrived at Mama Triangle’s house.

"The chief did not leave his spring horn here," said Mama Triangle.

Mama Triangle knew where they could find the spring horn.

It was evening when they arrived at Chief Short and Round’s house.

Mama Triangle pointed at the chief. "You are wearing your spring horn on your head."

Chief Short and Round gave Little Jojo the spring horn to blow.  They were happy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Hyena and Raven were once great friends.

They played together all the time.

One day Hyena said to his friend, "I would love to fly into the sky with you."

Raven gave Hyena some feathers, which he made into wings. 

But Hyena was too heavy and couldn't fly.

"Please could I hold onto your tail as you fly up?" asked Hyena as Raven flew up into the sky.

Raven flew and flew until he was very tired. 

But Hyena said, "Just a little further, my friend!"

Suddenly, Hyena felt a jerk. 

Raven's tail feathers came off in his hand!

Raven's feathers could not hold Hyena anymore.  

Hyena jumped thinking that the cloud would hold him, but it didn't!

By now he was falling fast. "Help!" he shouted. 

But no one could hear him. Raven was flying high above.

Hyena crashed into the ground below. 

He woke up with broken legs and grazes all over his body.

Ever since then, Hyena limps and he has marks on his body. 

He and Raven are not friends anymore.

------------------------------------------------------------



Gong! Gong! Gong!

We heard the village bell early in the morning.

"Boys, wake up and prepare the hoes," grandma called from her bedroom.

We yawned and stretched out of bed.

That day was nhimbe at Mbuya Sigauke's field.

We went to the hozi and collected all the hoes.

We carried the hoes to the fields.

The whole Chamutsa village had come to help Mbuya Sigauke.

Every farming season, the villagers help old people to weed their fields.

Everyone is given a portion to weed. 

This portion is called ndima.

When it was midday, the villagers sat under the big Mutsamvi tree to rest.

Mbuya Sigauke gave the villagers maheu to drink.

The villagers rested drinking maheu.

After resting, the villagers finished weeding the field.

Mbuya Sigauke was very happy. 

She thanked all the villagers for helping her.

In Zimbabwe, people do nhimbe to help others do their work. 

Do you help people in your community?

------------------------------------------------------------



Let me tell you about the palm tree.

This tree lives when everything else is dry.

The shade from a palm tree is always cool.

We eat fruit from the palm tree.

We use palm leaves to thatch our houses.

We make brooms and mats from palm leaves.

We use palm tree seeds for fuel.

Do you see why the palm tree is important?

------------------------------------------------------------



Where can I lay my egg? Can I lay it in a tree?

Cluck! Cluck! Cluck! It will fall and break!

Where can I lay my egg? Can I lay it on the roof?

Cluck! Cluck! Cluck! It will fall and break!

Where can I lay my egg? Can I lay it in the garden?

Cluck! Cluck! Cluck!  It will get wet when they water the plants!

Where can I lay my egg? Can I lay it in the pool?

Cluck! Cluck! Cluck! It will rot!

Where can I lay my egg? Can I lay it in the yard?

Cluck! Cluck! Cluck! They will take it and eat it!

I have been looking for a place to lay my eggs. I am tired.

I see a nest there. I will lay all my eggs in it!

This place is safe.

I will nurse the eggs right here until they  hatch!

Now, I have six beautiful chicks.

I am very happy.

I count them every day!

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Nema. 

Nema is sewing. Nema is sewing a skirt.

Nema is sewing with thread. The thread runs out. Nema needs to buy more thread. 

Nema needs money to buy thread. Where will she get some money?

Nema sees a tree. The tree is nearby. The tree has fruit. 

The fruits are papayas. Papayas are delicious.

Nema has a stick. She gets the papayas.

Nema arrives at the market. 

She arrives at the market with the papayas. She wants to sell the papayas.

Look at the man. The man buys a papaya. He gives money to Nema. 

Nema sells lots of papayas. She is going to buy thread with the money.

In the market she sees bananas. She does not buy bananas.

In the market she sees tomatoes. She does not buy tomatoes.

In the market she sees a sieve. She does not buy the sieve.

In the market she sees bread. She does not buy bread.

Then Nema sees a man. 

The man is selling thread. Nema buys thread.

Nema has thread! She is so happy. 

She will finish sewing her skirt with the thread.

------------------------------------------------------------



I was reading a magazine when I came across a lovely jacket.

I went to my father and asked, "Baba, please will you buy this jacket for me?"

"Thanyani, do you mean this jacket?" father asked. 

"Why do you want this pink jacket?" 

He looked worried.

"Baba, I like that jacket because pink is my favourite colour," I replied.

He did not look happy at all.

Father said to me, raising his voice, "Pink is for girls, and you are a boy. Ask for a blue jacket, man!"

I wondered to myself, but why can't I love pink? 

Can't boys love pink? Does this also mean that girls can't love blue?

Why is pink for girls and blue for boys?

What I do know, is that pink worries father.

I am a boy who likes pink.  I worry my father. 

But what is it about pink that upsets him?

Look inside the mouth of the person next to you. 

You will see that we are all pink inside.

When father shouts at me, I can see that even his mouth is pink inside!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once there was a family who had a tree with such sweet fruit that everyone visited their compound to taste the fruit. 

The family also had a very beautiful daughter. Many people admired her dazzling beauty, white eyes and above all, her great personality.

When she grew up into a young woman, young and old men flocked to her home seeking her hand in marriage. 

Her parents decided that the man who could sit in the compound the whole day without eating any fruit would be given her hand in marriage.

The news spread all over the village. The first man to come was the head of all farmers in the village. He was handsome, rich and young. 

He was welcomed and served the fruit. He sat for a few minutes, but before long, he ate the fruit and was sent away.

The leader of animal keepers was next. He was handsome, young and rich. The girl admired him. 

But when he was served with the fruit, he immediately ate it, and was sent away.

The next man to come had many pieces of land. He was arrogant and ugly. The girl prayed that he would eat and go away. 

When served, he refused to eat. The time passed, and the girl started begging him to eat. By four o'clock, he was overcome with hunger.

He ate and he, too, was sent away.

Next, the chief came around. He was arrogant, old,  and ugly. No one liked him in the village. The girl wished that he would eat and go away. 

When he was served with the fruit, he refused to eat. He stayed the whole day. At about six o'clock, he asked if he could use the toilet.

He was allowed to go. When he returned, the aroma of the fruit hung around him, and his lips were red! 

He had eaten the fruit in the toilet! To the girl's relief,  he was sent away.

A few days later, a young, handsome, rich prince arrived. The girl looked at him in admiration. She took him aside, and begged him not to eat the fruit. She served him much less fruit than the other suitors. 

But by midday the prince had already eaten and was sent away. The girl burst into tears of anger and disappointment.

The next day, a farmer came around. He was poor and lazy, but he was young and popular among many people for being a great talker. He came determined to win. 

The girl served him many fruits and asked him to eat and go away.

When he was served, he refused to eat. The girl waited painfully. Midday passed, and then two o'clock. At four o'clock, the farmer asked for water. 

The girl prayed that he would eat the fruit, but she was still praying when the clock turned to seven. This farmer had overcome the test of endurance set by the parents!

Her parents had to hand over their daughter to the "lazy one." The girl begged to be saved from her fate, but her parents could do nothing. 

As the farmer took her home, he sang such a beautiful song while clapping his hands. Many people flocked to the road to see the couple.

Among the people were servants of the rich prince. They called the farmer aside, and offered him money and cattle if he would leave the girl. 

Without a moment's hesitation, he took the money and the cattle, and walked off.

The servants dressed the girl in fine clothes and took her to the palace, straight to the prince. 

Before long, her parents were called and a ceremony was organised to join the two in marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------



"Hello! Surprise! We have come to visit!" they say.

"Hello! You are welcome!" replies the man. But he did not expect visitors.

The man rushes to his neighbour.

He calls, "My friends are visiting. I do not have any food. Please lend me some bread."

The neighbour shouts, "Do not bother me. The door is shut. I cannot give you anything."

But the man continues to knock on his neighbour's door.

The neighbour again tells him to go. And the man continues to knock.

Finally, the neighbour opens the door, and gives the man some bread.

So, he was able to return to his friends with food.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago,  there were two young men who lost their cows. 

They looked for the cows until it was late.

As it got dark,  they saw a light in a house. 

They agreed to go and ask for a place to sleep.

They went to the house and knocked. The door opened and they went in. 

The young men didn't see anyone. But they heard a voice greeting them.

The voice said,  "I am a louse. Open the metal pot and have food. Open the earthenware pot and drink amahewu."

Then the louse put on its skin and went out.

The young men ate,  drank,  and gave thanks. 

Then they left the house.

As they left,  they had a bad thought. They said,  "No,  it couldn't have happened that we had food from a louse."  

Eventually they agreed to go back and crush the louse.

They went back to the house and crushed the louse. 

Suddenly the louse was gone,  and the house disappeared! 

They found themselves outside in the open.

------------------------------------------------------------



Where is my cat?

I can't find my cat.

I can't find my cat anywhere.

Where is my cat?

Is he under the bed?

No, he's running out the room.

Where is my cat?

Is he on top of the cupboard?

No, he's on the bottom shelf.

Where is my cat?

Is he behind the couch?

No, he's outside in the yard.

Where is my cat?

Is he next to the bin?

No, he's jumping out the window.

Where is my cat?

Is he in the basket?

No, he's in the box.

Where is my cat?

Is he outside in the yard?

No, he's behind the curtain.

Where is my cat?

Here he is!

He is hiding in this cupboard!

------------------------------------------------------------



I looked again more carefully.

I saw a pregnant woman holding her belly.

The people in my village let the woman stay with us.

Later that night,  the pregnant woman cried,  "The baby! The baby is coming."

The woman gave birth to a baby donkey.

"What shall we do?" the people wondered.

They ran away. The woman thought,  "This baby is different. How shall I take care of it?"

In the end,  she decided to love her baby. The baby was different, but she was his mother.

The baby donkey grew bigger and his mother found it difficult to carry him.

Mother was sad. Baby donkey was angry. Baby donkey kicked his mother.

When he saw his mother on the ground,  baby donkey ran away.

Baby donkey was hungry,  tired and alone. He fell asleep.

When baby donkey woke up,  he saw a man standing next to him.

The strange man carried baby donkey to his home.

When baby donkey was old enough,  he carried the man on his back.

One day,  they went to the top of a hill and lay down to rest.

When baby donkey woke up,  he was alone,  again.

Baby donkey was worried. He went looking for his mother.

"Could that be my mother?" baby donkey wondered.

Baby donkey and his mother live together again. He carries his mother around their village.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a boy called Demane. 
He had a twin sister called Demazane.

When their mother and father died, they went to stay with their uncle. But they were badly treated. 

They were beaten with long sticks, and given thin porridge only once a day for food. So they ran away.

They found a cave to live in. They were scared because they had heard that there were cannibals living in the hills. So they made a strong door to cover the entrance, with only two holes to let in air and light. 

Demane warned his sister, "Stay in the cave while I am out hunting, and don't cook any meat. Cannibals love the smell of cooking meat."

Each evening Demane brought back and animal or bird he had killed. 

As he came to the cave, he sang, "Demazane, Demazane, child of my mother, open this cave to me. The swallows can enter it. It has two holes."

Demazane found it very boring to stay in the cave all day. So one day, when her brother had gone, she went out to explore. 

She found a stream to play in, and some trees to climb. She felt free and happy. "Perhaps, there are no cannibals. Perhaps Uncle said there were cannibals just to frighten us."

The next day she felt bold enough to make a fire to warm herself. But she made it inside the cave with the door firmly shut – just to be on the safe side. 

"I'm sure it won't matter if I put a little meat on the fire. It will be so good to have a cooked meal."

When her brother came home he sang as usual, "Demazane, Demazane, child of my mother, open this cave to me. The swallows can enter it. It has two holes." 

She opened the door and let him in. When he saw the cooked meat, Demane asked, "How did you do this without a fire?" 

"I dried the meat in the sun outside the cave," Demazane replied quickly. 

Demane was too tired to argue, and they sat down to enjoy the meal together.

The next day, she made a fire and cooked meat again. She had just finished when a voice sang outside the door, "Demazane, Demazane, child of my mother, open this cave to me. The swallows can enter it. It has two holes." 

But the voice did not sound like her brother's. Demazane said, "No. You are not my brother. Your voice is not like his." She felt safe in the cave.

A little while later, someone was singing outside the cave again, "Demazane, Demazane, child of my mother, open this cave to me. The swallows can enter it. It has two holes." 

The voice sounded just like her brother's, so she opened the door.

A huge hairy man filled the opening of the cave. He grabbed Demazane before she could run away. 

Demazane just had time to pick up some ashes from the fire. As she was being carried away, she dropped some ashes here and there along the path.

That day, all Demane had managed to trap was a hive full of bees. He carried them in a thick bag slung over his shoulder. When he came to the cave, he found the door open and his sister gone. 

But there were ashes pointing the way into the woods. He followed the ash along the path until he saw a fire in the distance.

Near the fire was a huge hairy man sitting with a large bag next to him. Demane walked up to the man, pretending to limp, "Please, father, can you help me? I've hurt my leg. I need some water." 

The man replied, "I'll get you some water, if you will promise not to touch my bag." 

And he put the bag carefully in his hut.

But when he had gone, Demane cut the string of the bag, and out climbed his sister. 

Demane replaced the bag with his own bag full of bees. Brother and sister hid and waited to see what would happen.

When the man came with the water, his son and daughter came with him. He said to his daughter, "There is something nice in the bag in our hut. Go! Bring it!" 

She opened the bag a little to see what it was, but the bees stung her hand, and she called out, "It is biting." 

"Go and help her!" he shouted to his son. But the result was the same.

"Don't treat me like a fool," he shouted, and stormed into the hut. He closed the door and opened the bag himself. 

The angry bees swarmed out and stung his head, his nose, his eyes. Blinded, he jumped about, howling with pain.

Then he ran and fell headlong into a pond, where his head stuck fast in the mud. He turned into a piece of wood like the stump of a tree. Just right for a bee hive. 

For a long time after that, Demane and Demazane ate delicious honey from that hive.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was an old woman who lived alone.

She had many chickens. Among them was a rooster that was very old and could no longer crow.

One day the old woman's grandson visited. She was very happy to see him.

She asked the young man to catch Old Rooster so they could cook and eat it.

Old Rooster heard the woman talking and its heart sank. "Aaiii, you are also very old but I don't see anyone trying to kill you, we will see!"

So Old Rooster sneaked away and decided to head for the big city to start singing. On the way, he met Cat.

"What has happened?" Cat asked. "My boss wants to eat me because I can no longer tell her the time," said Old Rooster. "I am going to the city to sing. Where are you going?"

"My boss also wants to kill me because I can no longer catch rats. I am running away," said Cat. "Can I join you?" "Let's go!" said Old Rooster.

They had walked a short while when they saw Dog running very fast. Old Rooster called Dog and asked why he was running so fast. "My boss chased me because I can no longer catch thieves," replied Dog while panting. 

"We have similar problems. We are going to the big city to sing," said Old Rooster. "Can I join you?" asked Dog.

As the three animals walked, Horse stopped them and asked what was happening. "Our bosses want to kill us because we can no longer do our jobs," they all replied together.

"I have the same problem, where are you going?" asked Horse. "We are going to the big city to sing," they replied. Horse asked to join them and they accepted.

They all walked until it was dark. They saw a house and when they reached it they heard noises inside. They were afraid and decided to sing a song to chase the people who were in the house.

Horse stood on the ground, Dog climbed onto Horse's back, Cat climbed on Dog's back, and Old Rooster climbed on Cat's back.

They immediately started singing. "Kookoliookoo," sang Old Rooster. "Myaaawuu myaaawuu," sang Cat. "Woo woo," sang Dog. "Wuuuu wuuuu," sang Horse.

They all sang loudly together. The people inside the house were thieves. The thieves were afraid and ran away.

Old Rooster, Gog, Horse and Cat entered the house and found food. When they had finished eating they went to sleep.

Old Rooster slept near the door, followed by Cat, Dog, and lastly Horse.

It was not too long before the thieves were back. Their boss was the first to go into the house.

He had just opened the door when Old Rooster pecked him with its beak. Then Cat scratched him with its nails. And then he found Dog, which bit him.

The man jumped but continued into the house. He found Horse, which kicked him to death.

The other thieves did not enter the house. They ran away, never to return.

The animals lived happily ever after in that house. Old Rooster told the time to his friends, and Dog kept them safe.

Cat killed all the rats in the house, and Horse carried them on its back wherever they wanted to go.

------------------------------------------------------------



"This year we are going to have a special family gathering," announced Mom Polygon. "Who is coming? I hope all the Polygons will be there. I miss my cousins," said Khosi. "I miss my side of the family the most, the Quadrilaterals," smiled Mom.

"Yes, it's a long time since we saw Rectangle, Square,  and Rhombus," said Dad Polygon. "Don't forget, they have three children now!" Mom reminded Dad.

"What about cousin Scalene and her children? Are they coming?" asked Vusi. Mom answered, "Yes,  they are Polygons, although they are not Quadrilaterals. Their surname is Triangle. The kids are Isosceles and Equilateral."

"Oh yes,  the Triangle family!" exclaimed Vusi. "But they look a lot like the Quadrilaterals." "No, not exactly," said Mom. "Triangles have three sides, while the Quadrilaterals have four sides, like me."

Dad Polygon added, "I am excited because my three other cousins will be here, they are Pentagon, Hexagon and Octagon. They are also part of our Polygon family."

Vusi asked, "Dad, why are we called Polygons?"  "We are called polygons because we are 2-dimensional shapes. We are made of straight lines, and our shape is closed, as you can see, all our lines join up. Our cousins the Triangles, the Quadrilaterals, the Hexagons and the Pentagons will all be visiting," replied Dad.

"Did you say that Octagon is coming? Is she also our relative?" asked Khosi.

"Of course my daughter, by just looking at her you can see she belongs to our family. You need to look carefully at the number of sides your cousins have, otherwise you might not be able to see the difference. Cousin Octagon has eight sides because her name starts with Octa," said Dad.

"Okay, what about Pentagon and Hexagon?" asked Vusi.

"Cousin Hexagon has six sides because his name starts with Hexa," replied Dad.

"Pentagons have five sides. Our teacher told us that Penta means 'five'," added Khosi.

"And remember that Tri means three and Quad means four. That's what makes your Triangle and Quadrilateral cousins look different," said Mom.

"Dad, how many sides does Heptagon have?" asked Vusi. Dad laughed and said, "I am not going to tell you. Remember we took a photograph with them at your uncle's wedding. I want you to look at the photograph carefully and tell me what you observe." 

Vusi looked at the photograph and quickly answered,  "Heptagon has seven sides!"

Khosi added, "Yes, remember our teacher told us that Hepta means 'seven'."

"Oh my wife, can you see how clever our children are? Okay, what about Deca, what does it mean?" questioned Dad. "Ten! Ten!" shouted Vusi and Khosi together.

"Yes, that's why one of your cousins is called Decagon, but he is not coming because he has to represent the swimming team. There are so few Decagons at their school," Mom told them.

Then the children asked, "Mom and Dad, can we invite our friend Circle from next door?"

Their parents agreed that Circle was welcome to join the family gathering. Just then they heard a knock at the front door, and Dad got up to check. "The Quadrilaterals are here! Welcome! Welcome" called Dad.

The rest of the family jump up to greet Square, Rectangle and the three Rhombus children.

The Quadrilaterals are happy to arrive first.

The Triangle family knock on the door soon after the Quadrilaterals.

Scalene, Isosceles and Equilateral are tired after their long journey, but they are so pleased to be with the rest of the family.

Finally, Octagon and Heptagon arrive with their children, two Pentagons and Hexagon. They have also brought three Squares with them.

Octagon explained, "I hope you don't mind that three Quadrilateral children from the village have come with us. They have never visited the city before."

"Friends and family are always welcome here," smiled Mom. Then she sent all the children outside to play.

"What game are we going to play?" Vusi asked the other children.

Equilateral squealed, "Let's play the tessellation game!" All the Polygon children started to tessellate.

"Can I play with you? I also want to tessellate," said Circle. Vusi said, "Shame, I'm sorry you can't tessellate my friend."

One of the Squares added, "Can't you see your shape, you are not a Polygon. Circles can't tessellate."

Circle was sad and felt left out. It's not so much fun playing together when someone is left out.

Vusi said, "Hey guys, let's rather play a game that Circle can also play."

So the Polygons and Circle played happily together until the delicious food was ready.







------------------------------------------------------------



On the first day of school, Xola was carrying a long black stick.

Other learners found this strange.

Teacher Fikelephi explained to the class that Xola was born blind. 

He uses a stick to find his way around the school.

The learners began to understand why Xola wore black glasses. 

The teacher went on to explain to learners that they should see him as one of them.

Zola overheard Lizo and the other boys plotting a plan to steal Xola's stick. 

The boys thought it would be nice to play with a new child at school.

On hearing this, Zola ran to sit in front next to Xola to protect him from the bullies. 

He told them the dangers of what they wanted to do. They apologized profusely to Xola.

The friends sat and talked about their love of football, drawing pictures, and watching animations. From this conversation, they realized that they had a lot in common.

They also talked about their differences. Zola complimented his friend's black glasses. This friendship created a network of peers who show appreciation and respect for each other.

It was a very happy day for Xola, he felt welcome and safe in his new school with his new loving friend Zola.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Cat.

This is Dog.

Cat and Dog walk. 

They walk in their village.

Then they see an egg. 

The egg is in the grass. 

The egg is alone in the grass. 

The egg is all alone.

Cat and Dog walk to a bird.

They ask the bird, "Is this your egg?"

But the bird says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the owl. Maybe it is his egg."

Cat and Dog walk to the owl.

They ask the owl, "Is this your egg?"

But the owl says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the goose. Maybe it is her egg."

Cat and Dog walk to the goose.

They ask the goose, "Is this your egg?"

But the goose says, "No, that is not my egg. Ask the two ducks. Maybe it is their egg."

Cat and Dog walk to the two ducks. 

They ask the two ducks, "Is this your egg?"

But the two ducks say, "No, that is not our egg." 

Then the egg breaks.

There is a lizard in the egg. 

A baby lizard.

The baby lizard says, "Where is my mother? Where is my father? Where are my mother and father?" 

Cat and Dog bring the baby lizard to his mother and father.

Bye bye Cat. 

Bye bye Dog. 

Bye bye baby lizard.



------------------------------------------------------------



There was once an old woman. She lived by herself inside a bottle. 

She complained all the time.

One day a fairy passed by her home.

She saw her looking very sad.

The fairy stopped and asked her, "What is the problem? Why are you so sad?"

"I am tired of living in a bottle," replied the old lady.

The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."

The old woman did as she was told. 

She found herself in a small house.

After a few days the fairy came back and found the woman still unhappy.

The fairy asked her, "What is wrong now? Why are you sad?"

"This house is too small. I do not like it," responded the old woman.

The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."

The old woman did as she was told. 

She found herself in a big house.

The fairy came to see the old woman again. 

She found her still unhappy and grumpy.

The fairy asked her, "What is wrong old lady?" 

The old lady responded, "This house is dark and dirty."

The fairy said to her, "Stand up, clap your hands twice, and turn around three times."

The old woman did as she was told.

She found herself back inside the bottle.

The old woman could not see the blessings she received. 

She ended up in her bottle, alone and unhappy.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Adiza. 

She is very respectful and hard working.

Adiza helps her mother with household chores.

After finishing, she goes to school.

At school, Adiza takes her studies seriously. 

The subject she likes best is Creative Arts.

On Saturdays, Adiza goes to the market with her mother.

Together, they buy foodstuffs for home.

Adiza helps her mother to cook for the family.

One day, her mother bought her a new dress.

Adiza liked the new dress very much.

Adiza wore the new dress and it fitted her perfectly. 

She was very happy and looked pretty in it.

Adiza thanked her mother for the new dress.

------------------------------------------------------------



one apple

two apples

one banana

two bananas

three bananas

one pineapple

two pineapples

one watermelon

two watermelons

one papaya

two papayas

one mango

two mangoes

one avocado

two avocados

one orange

two oranges

one guava

two guavas

one granadilla

two granadillas

one lemon

two lemons

one strawberry

two strawberries

one tangerine

two tangerines

one cherry

two cherries

three cherries

one grape

two grapes

many grapes!

How many fruit can you see?

------------------------------------------------------------



How many cats? 

0 Zero cats. 

No cats here!

How many cats? 

1 One cat. 

A black cat is eating red meat.

How many cats? 

2 Two cats. 

A white cat and a grey cat are sleeping.

How many cats? 

3 Three cats. 

Three cats are playing in the kitchen.

How many cats? 

4 Four cats. 

Four cats are Paul's friends.

How many cats? 

5 Five cats. 

Five cats chase the dog.

How many cats? 

6 Six cats. 

Six cats waiting for the dog.

How many cats? 

7 Seven cats. 

Seven cats playing in the compound.

How many cats?

8 Eight cats. 

Eight cats and one dog!

A kitten is stuck in a tree! 

"I will rescue you!" says Paul.

"Mama, can we keep him?"

How many cats? 9 Nine cats.

"That is too many cats!" says Mama.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time in a bright and cheerful school, there was a curious little boy named Achiodem. 

Achiodem loved exploring new things. One sunny morning, Achiodem decided to go on an adventure around his school.

Achiodem's first stop was his classroom.

It was filled with colourful posters, a cozy reading corner, and his favorite books.

Next, Achiodem visited the library.

The library was a magical place. It was filled with books about faraway lands and amazing adventures.

Achiodem then found himself in the art room. Here, colours danced and ideas came to life.

He saw paintings, sculptures, and crafts made by his friends.

In the science lab, Achiodem discovered bubbling potions and exciting experiments.

He saw a volcano model erupting, and a rainbow appeared in a glass bottle.

Achiodem's adventure continued to the playground. 

Here, he and his friends enjoyed slides, swings, and games of tag.

Next, Achiodem visited the music room, where melodies filled the air.

He played the drums with his friends, creating a joyful tune.

Finally, Achiodem ended his adventure in the dining hall. 

He and his friends enjoyed a delicious lunch together. It was the perfect end to a wonderful day.

------------------------------------------------------------



Little Ant loved to read. Little Ant was often teased.

"Ants don't read. Ants must feed. Ants collect the food they need."

Little Ant would read all day, he'd read and read the day away.

The other ants took what they found to store for winter underground.

His mum and dad got really mad, and Little Ant felt really bad.

In autumn when the leaves fall down, the ants must keep food underground.

The Queen wants food to fill the store, so all the ants must work some more.

Little Ant begins to shout about a place he read about. 

"A restaurant is what we need, a place where people go to feed. It says so in the books I read."

The ants go marching one by one.

They march into the setting sun.

And Little Ant said, "Hey, there's one!"

The ants go marching one by one, carrying a burger,  carrying a bun.

When they return the Queen is glad.

The stores are full. They cheer like mad.

Ant gets hugs from mum and dad.

His baby sister takes his hand, "Now I think I understand. The way you love to read a book makes me want to take a look."

------------------------------------------------------------



"Zo, Musa!" Mama called. "It's time to go to the village!" I jumped up, my heart racing. Today, I would visit grandmother's village for the first time! 

We packed biscuits and nice clothes as gifts. The bus rumbled down a dusty road, passing by trees.

When we arrived, Auntie Asabe ran to hug us. "Nna kwana!" she cheered. The village buzzed with laughter.

Children chased chickens, and smoke curled from clay huts. Grandmother greeted me with a bony hug. "You've grown tall, little lion!"

The next morning, cousin Laraba handed me a bucket. "Come! We fetch water from the river."

We walked past cassava farms. The river sparkled like diamonds. Laraba taught me to scoop water without spilling.

At the market, Auntie sold mangoes and colorful fabrics. I nibbled danwake (spicy boiled grain balls) and tapped a talking drum.

A man sold wooden carves, and grandmother bought me a tiny turtle carving. "For courage," she winked.

That night, villagers gathered around a crackling fire. Grandmother told stories of Gizo the spider. "Gizogizo tricked the snake into becoming a rope!" she cackled. 

The stars twinkled above, and I imagined Gizo weaving his webs in the sky.

On the last day of our visit, drums boomed! The village celebrated the Harvest Festival. Dancers in bright Atanfa cloth spun like whirlwinds.

Grandmother tied a sash around my waist, and I danced until my feet ached. "You're a true villager now!" Laraba laughed.

Time to leave. Grandmother pressed a woven bracelet into my palm. "Remember your roots, Musa," she whispered.

I hugged her, smelling the smoky scent of her dress. As the bus pulled away, I waved until the village became a tiny speck.

Back home, I drew pictures of the village: the river, the drums, Grandmother's smile.

Mama framed my drawing. "The village is always with you," she said. I fell asleep dreaming of frogs, firelight, and Gizogizo's tricks.

------------------------------------------------------------



My sister Kifue chases roosters that crow. 

What do I do? What do I know?

My brother Katleho has a ball to throw.

What do I do? What do I know?

My cousin Kutloano plants seeds in a row.

What do I do? What do I know?

My cousin Kamohelo leans on her hoe.

What do I do? What do I know?

My aunt Keromang has a dress to sew.

What do I do? What do I know?

My uncle Khotso herds the cattle that low.

What do I do? What do I know?

Mama dries wheat when the wind does not blow.

What do I do? What do I know?

Papa rides a horse over mountains in snow.

What do I do? What do I know?

Grandpa's slow donkey walks to and fro. 

What do I do? What do I know?

Grandma sings songs till the fire burns low.

What do I do? What do I know?

You know how to say yes. You know how to say no.

That's what you do! That's what you know!

Everyone laughs when you put on a show. 

Your work is to play. Your work is to grow.

------------------------------------------------------------



A poor farmer had an old ox that didn't like to work. The ox didn't want to plough the farmer's field.

He wanted to stay at home and eat grass, drink water and rest.

The farmer had a donkey, too. The donkey and the ox were friends. At the end of the day, the ox and the donkey talked to each other.

"I'm so tired," the ox said. "I worked hard all day. The plough is big and heavy. The farmer never lets me rest."

The donkey thought, "The ox is lazy. He doesn't like to work."

He cried, "Do you think your plough is heavy? Believe me, my friend, it is light! I carried a sack of grain on my back today. It was heavier than your plough, I am sure."

The next day, the two animals met again.

"I had a bad day today," the ox said. "My master's field is far away, and it was full of stones. I worked hard all day. I didn't have any rest."

"You worked hard?" asked the donkey. "Today I travelled many kilometres to the market in the town. I'm sure I worked harder than you."

The next day, the ox came home late again. "Oh, my friend," he said to the donkey. "Today was a very bad day for me."

But the donkey didn't want to listen to the ox any more.

He said, "You're always tired. When the farmer comes, lie down and say, 'Moo! Moo!' He will think that you are ill. He will let you rest."

The ox liked the donkey's idea. "Thank you, dear donkey, that's a very good idea," he said.

The next morning, the ox lay down and closed his eyes. "Moo! Moo!" he said.

The farmer looked at him. "My poor old ox is sick," he said. "But I must plough my field. Who will help me? Perhaps the donkey! He can pull the plough today."

The farmer tied the plough to the donkey, and began to hit him with his whip. "Go on! Faster! Pull!" he called out to the donkey.

The donkey worked hard all day, and in the evening he was very tired.

The donkey slowly walked home.

The ox said, "Dear donkey, I had a lovely day today. I ate some grass, drank some water and I rested. I want to rest again tomorrow. Give me another idea."

The donkey thought, "His work is much worse than mine. I don't want to do it again tomorrow."

The donkey said, "Be careful. The farmer said 'My ox is always tired and now he is sick. If he is not better tomorrow, I will kill him, and we can eat the meat.'"

The ox was very frightened. He cried, "Really? Did he say that? Then I will work tomorrow. I feel quite better now. I'm not tired at all!"

------------------------------------------------------------



To kill a baboon, you must have dry eyes.

The dog that barks, doesn't bite.

When hippos fight, it's the grass that suffers.

The chick dirties the nest because that's what she sees her mother do.

Don't say that there's an elephant there when you're up on my shoulders.

A frog and a toad are both born the same way.

A single fingernail cannot kill a flea.

The lion that doesn't have meat, eats grass.

It's the little goat in the back of the flock that gets the stick.

You're afraid of the dark when there are not even hyenas.

The chameleon dies of shame.

To see the eyes of a snail you must wait.

Laugh at the turtle, but he's the one that has water.

It's the visitor that kills the snake.

The hyena that howls in the fields does not eat millet.

The human-eating lion does not go out at night.

------------------------------------------------------------



A young man once lived with his mother. She cooked his food and cleaned his clothes. 

Then the man got married and his wife moved in. 

At first, all went well. But then the two women began to dislike each other.

One day, the husband came home late from the fields. "I'm hungry. Where's my dinner?" he called. His wife refused to answer. "What's the matter?" he asked. 

His wife began to cry. "Your mother hates me. She's always rude to me. I can't live with her any longer."

The man looked at his beautiful wife. He loved her. 

"Please, try to live with her. She's old and won't be with us for ever. Don't talk about it now. Bring me my dinner."

His wife said, "There is no dinner! I can't cook when that old woman is here. She insults me all the time." 

"But what can I do?" the man said. "She's my mother. This is her home. I can't send her away." 

"You must choose either her or me. You can't have both of us," she said.

That night, the man went to bed hungry. He couldn't sleep. "What can I do?" he thought. 

"How can I choose between my wife and my mother? My mother has loved me always. But my wife is young and beautiful. I can't live without her."

The next morning, his wife said to him, "Well, husband? Have you chosen?

"I want both of you!" said the man. 

"You can't have both of us," said his wife. "Kill your mother. We can have many happy years together."

The man went off to work in the fields. All day he thought about his wife and his mother. 

"My wife is right," he thought at last. "My mother is old. I will take her up the mountain and throw her over the cliff. Then my wife and I will be happy."

He went home from the fields. His wife asked, "Have you chosen?" "Yes, I have chosen you. Tomorrow I will throw my mother over the cliff. Now bring me dinner. I'm hungry." 

His wife said, "Yes, I have cooked all your favourite dishes. When your mother is dead, I will make them for you every day."

The next day, he said, "Mother, we are going up the mountain today. You will like it very much." 

"I'm old. I can't walk up the mountain," she said. "I'll carry you," he said and carried her up. 

At first his mother talked happily. He said nothing. Soon she stopped talking.

When they reached the top of a cliff, his mother said, "I understand everything my son. Throw me over, but don't fall yourself. Hold a branch of that tree to be safe." 

Surprised, the man said, "Mother, you know everything but you still love me!" "Only a mother knows love," she smiled sadly.

The man put his mother down and sat down beside her. He thought, "Does my wife love me as much as this?" 

Then he thought, "My wife is a wicked woman. I loved her once, but I don't love her now. I choose to keep my mother and send my wife away."

The man carried his mother down from the mountain. He took her home and sent his wife away. 

He lived happily with his mother for many years.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago there was an old woman who was a very good farmer. 

Her daughter got married to a man who lived on the other side of the river.

The old woman put some cassava, beans and yams in a small basket. She was taking it to her daughter and son-in-law.

After she had crossed the river, a strange voice shouted, “Put down your basket!”

The old woman asked, “Who are you?”

The voice answered, “I am the king of the forest. I give people fever and stomach-ache. I make them shiver and shake.” 

Frightened, the old woman threw down the basket and ran.

When she reached her son-in-law, she told him about the frightening voice.

Her son-in-law said, “Next time you come to visit us, take your big basket, and put your dog inside.”

A week later, the old woman took her big basket to visit her daughter and son-in-law.  

After she had crossed the river, the same voice said, “Put down your basket! I am the king of the forest. I give people fever and stomach-ache. I make them shiver and shake!”

She put down the basket, hurried on and watched from a distance to see what would happen. 

Out came the creature from under the bridge. It was only a small hare!

Eagerly, the hare took off the lid of the basket.

Out jumped a very angry dog!    

That was the end of the hare.

------------------------------------------------------------



Big hat. Little hat.



Little hands. Big hands.



Little goat. Big goat.



Big book. Little book.



Little smile. Big smile.



The end.

The end.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a small garden in the city, there was a big tree. Many small animals lived together on the big tree. 

There also lived a family of squirrels. Vikki was one little squirrel among them who liked to talk big. 

His cousin, Kato from Far Forest had come to visit him.

One evening, all the animals who lived in the little garden were just going to sleep.

They heard loud sounds from the park, next to the little garden.

Kato and the other squirrels saw big yellow machines. 

They also saw men in hard yellow hats, pointing to the little garden and other houses on the street. 

They were going to pull them all down and build a parking lot.

The people who lived there would move to other houses. 

No one gave a thought to the animals, birds and insects who lived in the little garden.

The machines were first spotted by the mole family. 

To be more exact, by Mister Popples, the eldest who told Master Mopples, who in turn told the youngest,  Little Popples.

When they were young they were called Pop, Mop and Pip.

Mister Popples told the squirrels, the squirrels told the birds, caterpillars, butterflies, tiny spiders and all those who lived in the little garden. 

There was total panic, a lot of running, flying, scurrying and hopping, with no one knowing what to do? Where to go?

The caterpillars said, "Let us look for leaves." The butterflies said, "We want flowers." The mice wanted holes. The squirrels, birds and insects wanted trees,  bushes and grass.

All the animals wanted the soft earth, not cement or concrete. 

"Where will we find all this?" they cried. "We will surely die," they said and wept.

Kato's uncle and aunt were very quiet and all the little squirrels crept close to their mom. 

Kato cleared his throat and spoke shyly, "I live in the Far Forest, may be we can all go there?"

There was a buzz of excitement and someone said, "How?"

Kato scratched his head and thought hard, "Well, the Squirrel Express can take the squirrels and the butterflies, spiders caterpillars and all the insects." 

He added, "The birds can either fly or come with us. The moles, mice and the grass snake family can go by the underground Mole Express."

Everyone thought it was a splendid idea. Mister Popples rushed to ask Mister Grumbles, the driver of the underground express train if he could take them all to the Far Forest. 

Mister Grumbles fumbled, stumbled, bumbled before he finally mumbled, "Alright." 

Now it was Mister Popples' turn to be grand. "Friends, you need not worry, my grandfather's grandson's. Third nephew's second niece's family live in the Far Forest."

So, in the early hours of the morning, the Squirrel Express and the Mole underground train with all its passengers were ready. 

They chugged their way to the Far Forest with its trees, flowers, ponds and soft earth.

------------------------------------------------------------



Fati was a little girl who ran like the wind.

She loved to laugh, and always tried hard to do as she was told.

Today was Sports Day at school. 

Fati played football and  ran in three races.

After school, she walked home with her good friend Hawa.  

Hawa said, "Fati, you are a fast runner!"

Fati arrived home and found her mother preparing food. 

She said, "Mother, good evening." 

Fati's mother replied, "Good evening. How are you?"

Fati said, "We had Sports Day at school today. I ran very fast.

I am hot, tired and very hungry."

Mother laughed and said, "My dear little Fati, you were born with fast legs!"

"I will make okro soup and dinner will be ready soon."

Mother put some palm oil in a big cooking pot and put it on the fire. 

When the oil was hot, she added onions and garlic and stirred until they were soft. 

Then she put in pepper, tomatoes and some water. Finally, she added six pieces of steamed cow meat.

Mother said, "Fati, please help me to stir the soup." 

Fati said, "Yes, Mother."

Fati stirred the soup once. 

She said, "This soup smells delicious."

Fati stirred the soup twice. 

She said, "This soup smells really delicious."

Fati stirred the soup three times. 

She said, "This soup smells truly delicious!"

Fati looked at her mother. 

Mother was not looking her way. She was cutting green leaves for the soup.

Fati took one piece of meat from the pot and ate it. 

"Mmm," she said.

Again, Fati looked at her mother. 

Her mother was not looking her way. She was cutting eggs for the soup.

Fati quickly took a second piece of meat from the pot and ate it. 

"Mmm. Mmm," she said.

Once more, Fati looked at her mother. 

Her mother was not looking her way. She was cutting green okro for the soup.

Fati very quickly took a third piece of meat from the pot and ate that too. 

"Mmm. Mmm. Mmm!" said Fati.

Mother came to the fire with the green leaves, eggs and okro. 

Fati was still holding the big wooden spoon.

Mother smiled and said, "Thank you for helping to stir the soup, Fati." 

Fati did not know what to say.

Mother put the green leaves, eggs and okro in the soup.

She took the spoon from Fati and started to stir the soup.

Mother looked into the pot. She could see the soup bubbling on the hot fire. 

Mother looked for the six pieces of meat in the pot. 
"One, two, three." Mother saw three pieces of meat and no more. 

Mother said nothing. Fati said nothing.

When Mother served the soup, Fati did not get any meat. 

Fati said, "Mother, I am sorry. I will not do that again." 

She never did. And that was the end of that.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Frog and Cat both wanted to marry Turtle's daughter.

Turtle's daughter loved Frog, but her father preferred Cat.

When Turtle learned that his daughter loved Frog, he came up with a plan.

"These two gentlemen will race each other, and the winner will marry you," he told his daughter.

Turtle told Frog and Cat about the race.

The frog suggested swimming instead of running, but the turtle refused.

Cat shared this news with his friends. They were happy because they knew that frogs cannot run. They only leap.

The cats waited for the day of the competition, but did not prepare themselves for the race.

The betrothed frog also met with his friends to tell them the news.

He said, "Turtle turned down my proposal. He said that Cat and I must run a race, and the winner will marry his daughter."

One of his friends quickly suggested, "Why don't you tell the turtle to let you and the cat swim? You will win because cats fear water."

The betrothed frog responded, "I suggested a swimming competition, but he refused."

Frog's friends were frustrated.

Another frog said, "This is an easy problem to solve. If we are united, you will marry Turtle's daughter.

"Cat is stronger, bigger, and faster than you. But together, we can think of strategies to win this race."

"Frogs look alike, so we can take turns in the race and the cat won't notice," suggested a different frog.

"One frog will start. Other frogs will hide in the grass by the road, and we will swap during the race.

"The betrothed frog will hide in Turtle's backyard."

Rat was the judge. She blew the whistle to begin the race.

The cat ran ahead. After a short distance, the frog cried, "Croak, croak, croak." Another frog jumped out in front of the cat, crying, "Croak, croak, croak."

Cat ran faster. But the frogs continued to take turns.

The cat was confused. He felt exhausted as he ran towards the turtles' compound.

The betrothed frog suddenly leapt ahead of the cat, beating him into the compound. 

Frog cried, "Croak, croak, croak!"

Rat declared, "Frog won the contest against Cat."

The cat complained, "I am sure I did not run with only one frog. They tricked me. They tricked me!" 

But the rat would not listen to the cat's complaints.

From that day on, the rat and the cat became enemies.

The turtle and the frog became good friends.

They got married, became a family, and lived happily ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a family with twelve children.

During the rainy season, the man planted some seeds in their garden. He said to his family, "I found these seeds and I don't know which plant they are from." 

He warned them, "Don't eat the fruit until we know what it is."

The seeds quickly grew into plants. The plants looked like pumpkin plants. 

Soon the round ripe fruit were ready for harvesting.

Just at this time, the father went away from his family, to work. 

The mother went to the market to look for food for her children.

The children were so hungry that they couldn't wait for their mother to return. The eldest child said, "Look, I'm sure those are pumpkins, let's pick some!" 

So they picked the plants. They cooked them and ate until they were full.

All the children fell down, dead! 

When their mother came home, she found her children lying lifeless. She saw the pumpkin skins on a plate.

She called a dove and asked it to fly to her husband.

When the dove reached the place where the man worked, it sang this song to him: 

Tsi tsi etsia mumbo,
Tsio khulola Ondieki, tsi tsi, 
Maondo ki yaraka, tsi tsi, 
Kamalira abana, tsi tsi, 
Ekhumi na babili, tsi tsi.

The man was worried when he heard the dove's song. 

He started the journey home and went as fast as he could.

On the way he stopped to ask the advice of a healer. 

The healer listened to the father's story, and then gave him a magic stick.

When the man arrived home, he touched each child with the magic stick. 

One by one, the children slowly came alive again.

After that day, the children never again ate pumpkins.

------------------------------------------------------------



There is a boy named Rodney. He lives with his family. 

His mother and father are Jamima and Mike. His sisters are Suzy and Lola. 

Rodney is the last born child.

Rodney loves playing chess. 

He loves it so much that whenever he plays chess, he does not talk.

One day, Rodney was at school playing chess.

 He realised that the game could be about his family.

Mike is the King. Jamima is the queen, which is why she has power. 

Suzy and Lola are the knights and bishops. 

Rodney is the pawn because he is younger.

After realising this, Rodney ran home to tell his family.

They all laughed at him at first. But later they understood. 

Rodney explained their roles and why he is a pawn.

Rodney told his mom that she is the queen, and his father a king. 

His sisters are knights and bishops.

Rodney is a pawn because he likes adventure! 

He can become anything he wants, even if he has to make some sacrifices.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once long ago, the birds had a meeting. They wanted a king, just like people and animals. 

Which bird should be king?

"Eagle, he is strong and kingly!" said one bird. "No,  he has no crown, and when he calls, he sounds too sad," said another.

"Then Ostrich, because he is the largest and roars like a lion," one called out. "No, he can't fly. The king of the birds must be able to fly."

"I think I should be king. I am so beautiful," said Peacock, fanning his tail.

"You are too proud," said Owl. "I have the largest eyes of any bird. I should be king." 

"No, not you, Owl," the other birds shouted. "You go to sleep when the sun rises!"

And so they didn't get very far with choosing a king. 

Then one bird had an idea. "The one who can fly the highest will be king," she said. 

"Yes, yes," all the birds shouted, and they all flew up,  up, into the sky.

Goose flew for one day, straight over the highest mountains in the world. Eagle flew for two days, into the sky high above the mountains. 

But Vulture soared for three whole days without stopping, straight toward the sun. Far above them,  the birds heard Vulture cry, "I am the highest, I am king!"

But then just above him Vulture heard a tiny voice,  "Tink, tink, tink! I am the highest, I am king." 

It was Ncede, the smallest bird of all. He had held onto the great wing feathers of Vulture as he soared into the sky.

"You won't beat me again," said Vulture, and flew straight up into the air. 

He flew up and up until he could fly no more. "I am higher than any other bird. I am your king!" he cried.

But out from under Vulture's wing crept the tiny bird. "Tink, tink! Tink, tink! It is I, the smallest one! I am your king." 

Vulture was too exhausted to fly any further.

So down he sailed, with the little bird still under his wing. 

The other birds were furious with Ncede. They waited for him, ready to pluck out all his feathers.

But quick little Ncede saw how angry the other birds were, and flew into an empty snake hole. 

The waiting birds told Owl, "With your big eyes, you must keep guard at the hole and catch him when he comes out." 

So Owl sat in front of the hole.

But the sun was warm and soon Owl fell fast asleep. 

Little Ncede peeped out of the snake hole. When he saw that Owl was asleep, he flew up and away.

Owl was very ashamed that he had let the little bird escape. 

Now he only hunts at night. In the day, he sleeps, away from the sight of the other birds.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day after a heavy rain, Iman looked across the sky and saw colours in it for the first time.

"How beautiful," she thought. 

Someone must have worked very hard, painting the sky with a brush like Daddy paints houses.

She ran to her sister and said, "Zarah look! Someone has painted the sky for us and made it beautiful."

But Zarah said, "No, silly. That is a rainbow. You are little and I am big. I know why it is in the sky. Let me show you."

Zarah took Iman to the zoo. 

She said, "Rainbows do not appear because lion cubs roar for the first time or because elephants are born."

She took Iman to a field of flowers and said, "They do not appear because butterflies lose their colours in the clouds."

She showed Iman a book. 

She said, "They do not even appear because rhinos run across the ground and scare colours up into the sky."

"I know why rainbows really appear. Mummy told me and now I'll tell you." 

Zarah took Iman's hand and led her to a playground.

"Rainbows appear in the sky because of children like you and me. One day, colours looked down from above and liked what they could see."

"They saw children with light skin, dark skin and everything in between. They thought, 'How wonderful it must be to be as beautiful as these.'"

"They came together in the sky and spoke about what they could do. 

They decided, 'If we are to be beautiful we must do it as a group.'"

"Now they join together and shine as brightly as they can. Hoping to be as beautiful as the children they see, just like you and me."

------------------------------------------------------------



Dog

Duck

Cow

Donkey

Mouse

Cat

Sheep

Goat

Pig

Chicken



------------------------------------------------------------



One Sunday morning, the chef in a restaurant put out a basket of fruits to make a fruit salad. 

The fruits started to talk to each other.

The apple said, "I am good for health, the chef will pick me." 

The banana said, "I am yellow and bright, the chef will pick me."

The pear said, "I have a nice shape, the chef will pick me." 

The pineapple said, "I am sweet and juicy, the chef will pick me." 

The pineapple squeezed and squashed the other fruits to be at the top.

The chef heard the fruits talking and said, "What a nice basket of fruits." 

The fruits started shouting, "Pick me, pick only me!"

The chef picked the apple first and put it into a bowl. The apple was happy and laughed at the other fruits. 

The fruits that were left in the basket were shouting, "Pick me, pick me!"

The second fruit that chef picked was the banana. He put it into the bowl. 

The apple and the banana laughed at the other fruits. The fruits that were left in the basket were shouting, "Pick me, pick me!" 

The chef picked the third fruit. It was the pear.

The pineapple was left in the basket and cried, "Pick me, pick me." Finally, the chef picked the pineapple. 

The fruits were amazed because they were all picked for the salad. 

"What a healthy, colourful, body building, nicely shaped, sweet, and juicy fruit salad," smiled the chef.

The fruits were proud and happy. They realised that they are all equally important. 

The fruits started singing, "Pick me, pick me, pick all of us!"

People in the restaurant loved the song and ordered the fruit salad.

------------------------------------------------------------



I woke up very early to get ready for school.

Mother was annoyed. I was too slow dressing up.

I ate my breakfast quickly.

I met my friends in school.

I opened my school bag. Oops! I still had mother's phone! I returned it in the bag.

It was time to go home. I looked into my school bag. Oops! Mother's phone was not in my school bag.

I started crying. The teacher asked, "What is the problem, Wanjiku?" I could not talk. I covered my face with my hand.

Finally, I said, "Mother's phone is lost." Teacher was surprised. We started looking for the phone.

I danced around in class. "Thank you teacher. Thank you teacher!"

I put mother's phone in my school bag. I said to myself,  "I will not play with mother's phone again."

------------------------------------------------------------



My name is Mintah. I have three siblings.

The names of my siblings are Adofo, Maabena and Asantewaa.

We attend the same school.

Every morning we walk together to school.

At home we play together.

Adofo and I like playing football.

Maabena and Asantewaa like playing ampe.

My siblings and I love spending our time together.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, animals had no legs. 

They all used to crawl.

Only people had legs, which Maguru gave to them.

One day, Maguru decided to give legs to every animal. He wanted them to walk. 

He told them about it.

The animals said, "It will be very nice to have legs."

They sang and danced.

The animals said it was hard to crawl. 

They felt pain.

When the day came, many animals went to Maguru's house.

Giraffes, lions, elephants, rabbits, crocodiles and birds stood in a line.

Each animal was given four legs.

Birds were given two legs each.

Everything was different after they got legs. 

Some danced for joy. Others fell down.

They went to show people. 

The animals said, "We will never crawl again."

The last one in the line was Millipede. Maguru asked,  "Is there anyone else after you?" 

Millipede answered, "No, I am the last one."

Maguru thought, "He is the last one. What will I do with the rest of the legs?"

Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.

Millipede was very happy. He said, "I will move faster than others."

After Millipede left, Snake came to Maguru's house. He said to Maguru, "Please give me some legs."

Maguru said, "I have given out all the legs. Where were you?" 

Snake answered, "I over-slept."

Maguru looked to see if there were legs remaining. 

He did not find any.

Maguru said to Snake, "Sorry. There are no legs left." Snake crawled home without legs. 

From that day, Snake does not sleep much. He is waiting to be first in line to get legs.

------------------------------------------------------------



Terna was a homeless man. He sought fruits for food in the forest. 

He sometimes slept there as baboons and gorillas watched him from the trees and bushes.

He wandered through the forest and saw more and more trees.

"These trees are here wasting away," he imagined.

Tired of wandering, he sat down, leaned on one of the trees and slept. 

The trees sheltered him from the sun and the birds flew above singing sweet songs.

He had an idea. 

"If I cut down some trees, I could make money and become an owner of many mansions."

He went to the village and borrowed a saw. He started cutting down trees. 

The gorilla begged him, "Please, don't cut down the trees. They are home for us and the birds. Their fruits are our food."

"I need money to make my own home," Terna said.

"It is selfish for you to destroy the home of many animals and birds to make yours," the gorilla said. Terna was sorry. He dropped the saw and hugged the gorilla.

His friend, the gorilla suggested that he could use mud to make bricks.  Then use grass and dead wood to make the hut.

 That way, both of them could have homes.

Terna agreed. He visited the gorilla often. The gorilla allowed him to pluck as many fruits and dead wood as he could.

 They became very good friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day in winter, Berhe was travelling to visit his relatives.

At a river, he came across a large snake.

"Where are you going?" the snake asked. "I am crossing the river," replied Berhe. 

The snake asked, "Please let me cross the river with you because I can't do it on my own."

Berhe was kind and answered, "Come, I will help you to cross the river." 

The snake climbed onto Berhe's head and they crossed the river.

Berhe told the snake to get down. The snake refused, "I will not, I'm comfortable here." 

Berhe was worried. If he hit the snake with his stick, he would hurt his head. If he grabbed the snake, it would bite him.

Berhe decided to get advice. He wanted hyena's opinion about the problem. 

"Good afternoon, hyena," said Berhe. "Good afternoon, how can I help you?" asked hyena.

Berhe continued, "I know you are very fair, so I want you to judge us."

Berhe explained what had happened with the snake, and asked hyena's opinion on the matter.

Hyena said, "You have crossed the river, therefore the snake must get down."  

But the snake refused to get down.

So they went to fox for his opinion.

Berhe said, "Fox, you usually have good judgment, and we want you to advise us."

"I helped the snake to cross the river. After we crossed, he refused to leave my head," complained Berhe.

Fox said, "If I have to judge, you both should be on the ground. If you don't agree with what I decide then you can go back to where you were." 

The snake came down from Berhe's head.

"Fox, please tell us your judgment?" asked Berhe. 

Fox replied, "The snake is on the ground. Your stick is in your hand. What do you want me to judge?"

After thinking a while, Berhe understood what the fox meant. 

Berhe beat the snake with his walking stick.

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived a farmer called Muna. He and his wife were blessed with two boys, Wang'ombe and Kiongo. 

The boys helped their parents in the house as well as taking their cattle to graze.

Wang'ombe loved to graze the cattle while Kiongo liked to play in the nearby bushes.

He would climb up the trees and chase little monkeys. The monkeys would in turn jump from one branch to another.

Wang'ombe did not like his brother's way of having fun. He thought it was dangerous and a waste of time.

Kiongo however, would hear none of those warnings even from his parents.

Kiongo even accused Wang'ombe of being a jealous brother. He swore that he would continue with his cheeky activities.

One day they were grazing their animals near a river. Kiongo came up with an idea. He wanted to show off.

"Wang'ombe!" he yelled at his brother to get his attention. He then dove into the foamy river ignoring the huge rocks that stuck out.

He wanted to show off his new swimming style. However, he was soon caught up inside the roaring splashes.

Wang'ombe stood by the shallow water. He watched and hoped that Kiongo would soon come up and swim towards the river bank.

Two minutes went by, then three and four and five. There was no sign of little Kiongo.

Then a stream of red water started oozing from the place that he had dived into. Wang'ombe panicked. He knew that his brother was injured.

He swam into the river to try and rescue his naughty brother.

By the time his brother got him out of the water, blood was gushing from his face. He was injured on his cheek.

He was crying and begging his brother not to report the incident when they got home.

The injury was impossible to hide. Kiongo was taken to the hospital for treatment and finally he got well. 

He had learnt to listen to advice.

------------------------------------------------------------



Fati was a little girl who ran like the wind.

She loved to laugh, and always tried hard to do as she was told.

One day, Fati went on a bicycle with her father to the farm to pull some weeds.

Soon, Fati was tired. She said, "Father, I am hot and tired. May I sit under the mango tree?" 

Father said, "Yes Fati, you may sit there. But, please, do not climb any trees today."

Fati sat under the mango tree. 

Fati looked up. She saw one, two, three ripe mangoes!

Fati looked over at her father. He was busy and not looking her way. 

Quietly, Fati started to climb the mango tree. She thought, "I will sit here. It is a good place to rest and eat ripe mangoes." 

So, she sat and ate.

After she ate the mangoes, Fati climbed down. 

Only to see another tree. 

This tree had something brown dripping down its bark.

It was honey! Fati loved honey! But she did not love bees. 

Fati looked up and saw only one little bee.

Fati thought, "There is only one little bee. It will not hurt me if I climb the tree and look for honey."

Fati looked at her father. He was not looking her way. 

So, Fati climbed up to the top of the tree and took honey from a deep hole.

Fati thought, "I will sit here. It is a good place to rest and eat plenty of sweet honey." 

So, she sat and ate.

After she ate the honey, Fati climbed down the tree. 

Then she saw the bees. So many of them! BZZZ! BZZZ! BZZZ! 

Fati ran away from the bees.

Fati ran to her father. She was huffing and she was puffing. 

Father said, "Fati, where have you been?" 

Fati did not want to say where she had been.

So, she said, "Look, Father, I have a mango. Would you like to eat it?" 

Father said, "No, thank you, Fati. We must go home now. It's about to rain."

On the way home, Fati sat behind her father on the bicycle. It started to rain.

Father went too fast on the bicycle. 

The bicycle went off the path. 

CRASH!

The bicycle fell on Fati's leg.



At home, mother and grandmother asked about the day at the farm. 

"Fati climbed a tree," said father. 

"Father went too fast on the bicycle and it fell on my leg," said Fati.

"Oh, poor Fati," said mother. 

"Poor, poor Fati," said grandmother. "We must take care of your leg." 

And they did. And that was the end of that.

------------------------------------------------------------



Hamisi needs a new school uniform. 

His dad takes him to the market.

Hamisi sees a boy wearing a beautiful shirt. 

"That is a very fine shirt," thinks Hamisi.

"Dad, I wish I had a shirt like the one that boy has," says Hamisi.

"Look, there are those beautiful shirts," says Hamisi. "Dad, please buy one for me."

"Hamisi, I have to buy your uniform," says dad.

"I do not have enough money for that shirt," says dad.

Hamisi's dad buys the uniform. He is surprised when he gets the change. 

He has enough money left over to buy a shirt for Hamisi!

It is Hamisi's lucky day! 

Which shirt will he choose?

------------------------------------------------------------



Khotso rides a donkey. His donkey is blue.

Khotso and his donkey eat together.

Grandmother Thabo is cooking. She is cooking in a black pot.

Grandmother Thabo and her cat eat together.

Neo's cow is as green as grass. The cow stands on Neo's foot.

She drops her bucket of milk.

Ntate Phakane has a black horse. His horse is very strong.

The horse pulls the plough all by itself.

Thabang drives his car. He travels with his dog.

Thabang's dog poops in the car!

The blue donkey, the green cow, the black horse, and grandmother's cat got into Thabang's car.

They all started to sing.

Who do you think has the sweetest voice?

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago Hen and Eagle were friends.

One day, Eagle found Hen under a tree resting with her shopping bags. Hen was standing on one leg.

Eagle asked Hen, "Where is your other leg?"

Hen told Eagle, "The shopkeeper cut off my leg and gave me these groceries in return."

Eagle asked Hen whether he could do the same. He also wanted a bag of groceries. 

Hen agreed.

Eagle went to the shopkeeper and asked her to cut off one of his legs in exchange for groceries. 

The shopkeeper accepted.

The eagle hopped on one leg all the way home.

But he was happy with the things the shopkeeper gave him.

When Eagle reached home, he found Hen with both her legs.

Eagle was furious and chased Hen. But he never caught her. 

That is why, Eagle always looks out for Hen's children. Whenever he catches one, he eats it.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was only one bus in Ebei's village. 

It was big and blue. It was very noisy.

"Tomorrow we will go to town," said Ebei's mother. "We will buy your school uniform."

Ebei was very excited. They would travel in the big blue bus. 

He could not sleep that night.

When his mother came to wake him, Ebei was already dressed.

Ebei and his mother walked to the bus stop. They waited for the big blue bus. 

But the bus did not come.

Other people arrived at the bus stop. 

They complained because the bus was late. "Where is the bus?" they asked.

Ebei was worried. "We will not be able to go to town," he thought. "I will not be able to get my uniform."

Some people gave up and went home. Ebei cried. He did not want to go. 

"We will wait a bit longer," said his mother.

Suddenly, they heard a noise. They saw dust in the air. 

The bus was coming!

But this bus was not blue. It was not big. It was red and small. 

The people did not want to get in this bus.

"Get in! Get in!" shouted the driver. "We are very late today," he called.

Ebei and his mother got in first. 

Soon everyone else got in the small red bus.

Ebei looked out the window. 

He saw more people at the bus stop.

Even more people were running to catch the bus. 

But they were too late. The red bus was full. It left for town.

"Where is the big blue bus?" asked Ebei's mother. 

"It broke down," replied the driver. "We are fixing it. It will come tomorrow."

Ebei did not care about the colour of the bus. He did not care about the size. 

All he cared about was that this bus was going to town!

------------------------------------------------------------



A naughty little mouse with fur was sitting on the fence, watching the house of the Zwane family.  

It was thinking about how it would get inside the house to be naughty! 

We all know that mice are very naughty.

The naughty little mouse soon found a way inside the house. It climbed on a table and found a computer. 

It started chewing the cable. 

Do you see the naughtiness we are talking about? 

Just think about long teeth biting on the computer cable!

Suddenly, a voice cried, "Don't bite that cable! The cable is my tail! You are hurting me!"

The naughty little mouse with fur looked around to see who was speaking. It asked, "Who are you?"

The computer mouse answered, "I am the computer mouse. I stay here, this is my home."

The naughty little mouse with fur laughed. "How can you say you are a mouse? I am a real mouse. You don't look like me."

"I will show you how a real mouse behaves," said the naughty little mouse with fur.

It ran to the kitchen and stole a piece of cheese cake. It said, "Do you know how to eat cake? You don't even have a mouth!" 

While cracking with laughter.

The computer mouse pressed itself. 

Click, a picture of a large cake appeared on the computer screen. 

The naughty little mouse with fur was impressed.

It thought for a moment, and then looked around the desk. It saw a pencil.

The naughty little mouse with fur picked up the pencil and started chewing it. 

What a mess! Little pieces of pencil fell all over the desk.

The naughty little mouse was pleased with itself. "Look at what a real mouse can do to wood!"

The computer mouse pressed itself again. Click. "Look at what I can do to wood," it said. 

Tree stumps and logs appeared on the computer screen.  

"Wow," said the naughty little mouse with fur. It was even more impressed.

The naughty little mouse with fur asked the computer mouse, "Can you dance?"

The naughty little mouse started to dance.

It was so busy enjoying itself, that it didn't notice the house cat looking up at the table.

The cat sprung on the table!

"Today I am going to show you who I am!" meowed the cat as it reached for the naughty little mouse.

The naughty little mouse with fur was terrified and started running. "Help, help!" it squeaked.

The computer mouse pressed itself. Click, a video of a barking dog appeared on the computer screen. "Woof, woof!"

The cat got a fright. It jumped off the table and ran away.

The naughty little mouse with fur was safe.

The naughty little mouse with fur hugged the computer mouse. 

"Thank you, you saved my life!" it said to the computer mouse.

The little mouse with fur was now behaving.

------------------------------------------------------------



Anansi is a lazy spider.

He loves food, but he is too lazy to cook.

Anansi visits Rabbit and asks to share his vegetables.

"Yes. Help me with stirring," says Rabbit. 

But Anansi is lazy.

"I will come back later," says Anansi.

Anansi ties some web around his leg and to Rabbit's pot.

"Pull the web when the greens are ready," says Anansi.

"Monkeys, can I share your beans?" 

"Yes. Help us with chopping."

"I will come back," says Anansi. 

He ties more web.

"Warthog, can I share your potatoes?" 

"Yes. Help me with preparing."

"I will come back," says Anansi. 

He ties more web.

Soon,  each of Anansi's 8 legs is tied to a pot.

Anansi feels a pull on leg 2. 

Then leg 3.

All 8 legs are being pulled! 

"Stop pulling!" cries Anansi.

No one hears Anansi crying. 

The webs break one by one.

Anansi's legs stretched! 

And so all spiders have long thin legs.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a time when all the animals lived together as friends. 

One day, they decided to have a meeting to elect a king.

Rooster wanted to be king. So he lied to the other animals. 

He told them, "The red comb on my head is fire! Don't touch the comb on my head!"

The other animals believed Rooster. They decided to elect Rooster as their king. 

The animals hoped that Rooster's fire would help them in cold weather.

Then came a day when it rained. And rained. And rained. 

It was cold. Everything was wet and cold.

"Where can we get fire to warm our bodies?" Rabbit asked the other animals.

"We can get fire from the comb on Rooster's head. Rooster is our king because he has fire on his head," said Monkey.

The animals agreed with Monkey. 

They sent Fox to collect fire from king Rooster.

Fox found Rooster in a deep sleep. 

So he decided to take fire without asking Rooster.

Fox collected some dry grass. He put the grass next to the comb on Rooster's head. 

Nothing happened. The grass did not catch fire.

"Wake up king Rooster!" yelled Fox. "We need fire now."

But Rooster could not give fire to Fox.

Fox was angry.

Fox went back to the other animals. He told them the truth about the comb on Rooster's head. 

From that day, no one was afraid of Rooster.  And foxes eat roosters and their families.

------------------------------------------------------------



The small bus stop in my village was busy with people and overloaded buses. On the ground were even more things to load.

Touts were shouting the names where the buses were going.

"City! City! Going west!" I heard a tout shouting. 

That was the bus I needed to catch.

The city bus was almost full, but more people were still pushing to get on. 

Some packed their luggage under the bus. Others put their things on the racks inside.

New passengers clutched their tickets as they looked for somewhere to sit in the crowded bus. 

Women with young children made them comfortable for the long journey.

I squeezed in next to a window. The person sitting next to me was holding tightly to a green plastic bag. 

He wore old sandals, a worn out coat, and he looked nervous.

I looked outside the bus and realised that I was leaving my village, the place where I had grown up. 

I was going to the big city.

The loading was completed and all passengers were seated. Hawkers still pushed their way into the bus to sell their goods to the passengers.

Each one was saying what was available for sale. The words sounded funny to me.

A few passengers bought drinks, others bought small snacks and began to chew. 

Those who did not have any money, like me, just watched.

These activities were interrupted by the hooting of the bus, a sign that we were ready to leave. 

The tout yelled at the hawkers to get out.

The hawkers pushed each other to make their way out of the bus. 

Some gave back change to the travelers. Others made last minute attempts to sell more.

As the bus left the bus stop, I stared out of the window. 

I wondered if I would ever go back to my village again.

As the journey progressed, the inside of the bus got very hot. 

I closed my eyes, hoping to sleep.

But my mind drifted back home. Will my mother be safe? 

Will my rabbits fetch any money? Will my brother remember to water my tree seedlings?

On the way, I memorised the name of the place where my uncle lived in the big city. 

I was still mumbling it when I fell asleep.

Nine hours later, I woke up with loud banging and calling for passengers going back to my village. 

I grabbed my small bag and jumped out of the bus.

The return bus was filling up quickly. Soon it would make its way back east. 

The most important thing for me now, was to start looking for my uncle's house.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is the first day of the term and Mrs Clark's pupils are excited to be back at school. 

On the closing day of last term, Mrs Clark gave the pupils a holiday assignment.

The pupils are excited to share their holiday experiences.

"Welcome back to school, everyone," says Mrs Clark with a big smile.

Mrs Clark asked each pupil to draw what they enjoyed most during the holiday.

Johannes goes first. He draws what he enjoyed most from his holiday.

"They are triangles," says Lydia.

"They are huts," says Andile.

Johannes finishes drawing. They are not triangles. They are not huts.

"These are pyramids," explains Johannes. "Pyramids are the tombs used for Egyptian kings. 

My family visited Egypt."

Sibongile goes next. She draws what she enjoyed most from her holiday.

"They are cows," says Suren.

"They are buffaloes," says Mthobisi.

Sibongile finishes drawing. They are not cows. They are not buffaloes.

"These are wildebeests," explains Sibongile. "Every year, thousands of wildebeests migrate from Kenya to Tanzania. 

My family visited Kenya."

Marilize goes next. She is Johannes' sister.

"She will draw pyramids," says Jane.

"She will draw Egyptian kings," says Kuda.

Marilize finishes drawing. They are not pyramids. They are not Egyptian kings.

"These are hieroglyphics," says Marilize. "This is the writing used by Egyptian people a very long time ago.

We saw hieroglyphics written in the tomb of King Tutankhamun."

Kuda goes next. He draws what he enjoyed most from his holiday.

"It is a castle," says Johannes.

"It is a safari lodge," says Sibongile.

Kuda finishes his drawing. It is not a castle. It is not a safari lodge.

"This is the Great Zimbabwe," explains Kuda. "It was an important African city nearly 1000 years ago, in the Kingdom of Zimbabwe.  

It was built from small stones, without any mortar!"

The bell rings for the pupils to go home.

Tomorrow, they will continue sharing their holiday experiences.

What did you do during your last holiday?

Draw what you enjoyed most from your holiday.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was an old woman who lived with her three grandchildren.

Every morning they all went to work in the field. 

One day, one of the girls said, "Grandmother, I don't feel well today."

So, the old woman sent the child home.

When the girl got home, she saw that there was meat in the pot. 

She ate all the meat and then went to sleep.

The old woman and two children were tired and hungry when they returned from the field. 

Grandmother prepared ugali for supper, to eat with the meat she had cooked that morning.

She opened the pots to serve her grandchildren. 

When she opened the pot with the meat, it was empty!

"Who ate the meat?" asked Grandmother, frowning. 

But all three grandchildren shook their heads. "Not me," each one said.

Their grandmother tied a rope across the river. 

She told each of them to walk on the rope as they sang a song.

"The one that ate the meat will fall into the river, and learn to tell the truth," warned Grandmother.

The first granddaughter walked quickly across the river, singing the song.

The song went like this: 

Nimbe esia ulire inyama. 
Mukoye khalira engwe mu nyanza. 
Engwe mu ndaliro engwe munyanza. 
Mukoye khalira engwe mu nyanza.

The other two grandchildren began to argue with each other. 

The girl said to the boy, "You go next." The boy replied, "No, you go next!"

The granddaughter who ate the meat was scared and shivering. 

As she stepped forward to walk on the rope, she slipped and fell into the river.

"Help! Help!" shouted the girl. 

Grandmother said to the other two, "She is guilty, but we must help her."

Together they pulled the frightened girl out of the river. 

Since that day, the old woman's grandchildren have always told the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------



There is a woman called Mrs Rubandama. 

She lives in Kakuuto village.

She has a sewing machine. 

She uses it to make clothes of different fashions.

She makes different costumes.

She makes school uniforms of grey and white for boys and girls.

She makes blue uniforms and many other colours.

She makes aprons for chefs.

Her husband helps to measure and cut patterns.

She makes casual clothes for outings.

She makes tops, skirts and shorts.

She also makes beautiful bridal clothes.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is Saturday morning. 

The children are gathered at the park. 

Everyone is playing.

Then, Tshegofatso pulls Neo off the swing! She is a bully! Can you see?

No one wants to play with Tshegofatso again.

There is a soccer match on the other side of the park.

The blue team scores a goal.

They are happy.

The pink team players are unhappy. They start fighting with the blue team.

Is it right to start fighting because you are losing?

Everyone enjoys the park. Some are walking, some are reading. What other activities do you see?

What a wonderful time when people are relaxing.

Look carefully at this picture. 

Can you see what happens if people throw their rubbish on the ground? 

It pollutes the park.

When we play together, it is important to respect one another.

Some are skipping rope, others are roller-skating. What else can you see?

We must all take good care of the park, and keep it clean. 

It is our park.

Look at how beautiful our park is!

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandma's garden was wonderful. It was full of sorghum, millet, and cassava. But best of all were the bananas. 

Although Grandma had many grandchildren, I secretly knew that I was her favourite. 

She invited me often to her house. She also told me little secrets. But there was one secret she did not share with me: the place where she ripened bananas!

One day I saw a big straw basket placed in the sun outside Grandma's house. When I asked what it was for, the only answer I got was, "It's my magic basket." 

Next to the basket, there were several banana leaves that Grandma turned from time to time. I was curious. 

"What are the leaves for, Grandma?" I asked. The only answer I got was, "They are my magic leaves."

It was so interesting watching Grandma, the bananas, the banana leaves and the big straw basket. But Grandma sent me off to my mother on an errand. 

"Grandma, please, let me watch as you prepare." "Don't be stubborn, child, do as you are told," she insisted.

I took off running.

When I returned, Grandma was sitting outside but with neither the basket nor the bananas. "Grandma,  where is the basket, where are all the bananas, and where..." 

But the only answer I got was, "They are in my magic place."

It was so disappointing!

Two days later, Grandma sent me to fetch her walking stick from her bedroom. As soon as I opened the door, I was welcomed by the strong smell of ripening bananas. 

In the inner room was grandma's big magic straw basket. It was well hidden by an old blanket. I lifted it and sniffed that glorious smell.

Grandma's voice startled me when she called, "What are you doing? Hurry up and bring me the stick." 

I hurried out with her walking stick. 

"What are you smiling about?" Grandma asked. Her question made me realise that I was still smiling at the discovery of her magic place.

The following day, Grandma came to visit my mother. I rushed to her house to check the bananas once more. There was a bunch of very ripe ones. 

I picked one and hid it in my dress. After covering the basket again, I went behind the house and quickly ate the banana. It was the sweetest banana I had ever tasted.

The following day, when Grandma was in the garden picking vegetables, I sneaked in and peered at the bananas. Nearly all were ripe. I couldn't help taking a bunch of four. 

As I tiptoed towards the door, I heard Grandma coughing outside. I just managed to hide the bananas under my dress and walked past her.

The following day was market day. Grandma woke up early. She always took ripe bananas and cassava to sell at the market. 

I did not hurry to visit her that day. But I could not avoid her for long.

Later that evening I was called by my mother and father, and Grandma. I knew why. 

That night as I lay down to sleep, I knew I could never steal again. Not from grandma, not from my parents, and certainly not from anyone else.

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandma greets me.

We ran to look at grandma's cow.

I caught up with her.

I ran away from her.

Grandma got very tired.

------------------------------------------------------------



Chalew is a horse that pulls a cart.

He carries heavy loads along the gravel roads of Debre Birhan. 

He works from morning to evening.

Chalew does not get enough time to rest.

He does not get enough food to eat.

The driver of the cart beats him to go faster.

One day, all the cart drivers gathered for a funeral.

The cart horses were left to graze in a nearby field.

They began to talk about their terrible conditions.

"My harness doesn't fit me. It is too tight and cuts my skin," said one horse. 

"Me too, me too," another agreed.

An old horse spoke, "I'm almost lame because of the nails they hammer into my hooves." 

More horses nodded in agreement.

"We work very hard, but most of our owners treat us badly. Many do not know how to look after us," said Chalew. 

All of the horses agreed.

"We need better conditions. Let's go on strike!" declared Chalew. The horses cheered! 

They decided to stay in the field until the cart drivers agreed to change.

The cart drivers did not know what to do.

"I can get another horse," boasted one driver.

But most of the drivers needed their horses to earn a living.

The drivers held a meeting to discuss the strike. They argued for a long time. 

"Maybe the horses are right," said one man. "Why should they get better conditions?" asked another.

The horses' strike spread from the town of Debre Birhan across Ethiopia. 

Nearly three million horses refused to work. "We have had enough! Treat us fairly!" they said.

So, the cart drivers were forced to change. They agreed to better conditions and fair treatment for all horses.

They learned how to look after the horses, and keep them healthy.

Slowly, the horses' lives improved. 

They got enough food and rest. Their harnesses fitted. They got better shoes for their hooves.

Old Chalew became a hero to all horses!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a man called Byantaka who had a cow. Each day he grazed his cow. 

He also gave the cow water to drink, but Byantaka only had a very small pot for water.

So, he went at his neighbour's home to borrow a bigger pot for water. 

His neighbour agreed to lend Byantaka his biggest clay pot saying, "My neighbour's problem is my problem."

After a few days, Byantaka went to a potter and bought a small pot. He took it home. 

He put the small pot inside the big pot that he had borrowed from his neighbor.

Then, he put the big pot, with the small pot inside it,  on his head. 

He carried the big pot to the neighbour who loaned it to him.

Byantaka told him, "I am returning your pot, it has reproduced." 

The neighbour was amazed that his pot had produced another pot. He praised Byantaka saying, "Your home is blessed."

After a while, Byantaka went back to his neighbour to borrow the pot again. 

He did not have good intentions.

The owner of the big pot waited excitedly for Byantaka to return his pot. 

Eventually he went to Byantaka's home and said, "I have come for my pot."

Byantaka told his neighbour, "My friend, your pot died. I was just on my way to tell you the bad news."

His neighbour clapped his hands together in surprise. His face began to swell with anger. 

He shouted at Byantaka, "I have never heard of a pot dying!"

Byantaka replied, "My friend you should accept these things. Everything that reproduces must die. I was also very sorry about the big pot's death."

His neighbour was very angry and he went to court to report Byantaka. The judge listened to explanations from both of them. 

He found the owner of the pot was in the wrong and decreed that Byantaka must be allowed to keep the dead pot.

"When Byantaka told you that the pot had reproduced, you accepted. When he says that every living thing which reproduces must die, he is correct." 

That is how the judge judged the case.

Byantaka's neighbour went home walking like a snail. 

Byantaka had got the big pot with his cleverness.

------------------------------------------------------------



There once lived an animal called Fox, and two birds called Tok and Sparrow.

One day, Fox was walking around the bush. 

He discovered that Tok had laid eggs in a nest at the top of a tree.

He said, "Tok, do you have eggs in your nest?"

Tok replied, "Yes, I do!"

"Give me an egg, or I'm going to cut down this tree right now," said Fox.

Tok gave him an egg and Fox went away.

The next day, Fox returned to Tok.

"Should I cut down this tree, or will you give me an egg?" asked Fox. 

Tok gave him an egg.

When Sparrow came to visit Tok, she found her friend was very thin.

"Fox is threatening to cut down my tree with his axe," cried Tok.

Sparrow said, "Waaaaaaa!!"

She continued, "Don't you know that the axe he is using is not real? That axe is made of mud!"

"If he comes back again and demands an egg, tell him to chop down the tree," said Sparrow.

Tok agreed and Sparrow left.

Fox returned and asked, "Will you give me an egg, or should I cut down this tree?"

Tok replied, "You can cut down the tree!"

Fox said, "Are you sure that you want me to cut down the tree?

Because if I do, I'm going to eat all your eggs."

"You had better give me an egg right now!" concluded Fox.

Tok refused. She said, "Sparrow told me that your axe is made of mud."

From that day, Sparrow and Fox became the greatest of enemies!

------------------------------------------------------------



Adun was very beautiful. All the men in her village wanted to marry her. 

But Adun refused them all.

One market day,  a man borrowed legs from another man,  and arms from another,  and a body from a third man. 

Then this man joined all the parts together. He put his head on top and went to the market.

This man wanted Adun and was determined to marry her. Adun was pleased by his appearance. She wanted to be with him. 

The man came from a far town,  and Adun decided to return with him.

As Adun and the man journeyed to his place,  the owner of the legs took the legs back. Then the owner of the arms took his arms back. 

And finally the owner of the body took that back.

Only the head was left,  and the head went on. Adun was scared but she did not run away. 

They arrived at the house of the head.

The following morning,  before the head went to his farm,  he spoke to Tortoise. "If Adun tries to escape,  blow this horn to tell me," said the head.

After the head left,  Adun packed her things. Then she began to run away.

Seeing her,  Tortoise blew the horn,  "Head,  head,  Adun is about to run away," puffed Tortoise.

The head went up to Adun and said,  "Where do you think you are going?" 

Adun went back to the head's house.

Eventually Adun consulted a diviner about what to do. 

The diviner advised,  "Go and buy some bean cakes. Soak them in palm oil and put them in Tortoise's horn."

Adun followed the diviner's instructions. She put the oily cakes into the horn.

The following day,  she took her things and began to run away again. 

When Tortoise took the horn to blow it,  the delicious bean cakes fell into his mouth.

Tortoise ate,  ate and ate. 

And Adun ran away.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie, Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings.

Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.

The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck.

"Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.

Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone, I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children.

"Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes, 12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."

The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages.

"I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie, "it's quicker."

"I'm going to count in 3s, just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.

Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look, there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests.

"How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.

The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck.

They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side, to balance the load.

"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see, how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"

Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market.

"If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself, "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"

Back at the farm, Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired.

Mama K tells them, "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what I have for you today?"

She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them.

When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!

"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and apples fall onto the table.

"See, I was right!" Duksie squeals.

Mama K tells the children, "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"

First the children count the apples in 2s.

They count: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 1 apple left over. Altogether there are 17 apples.

Next, they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over.

The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?

"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie.

"How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya.

"I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.

Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling.

"I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.

"Yay!" shout the children."



------------------------------------------------------------



It was the end of the school term. Our headteacher announced at the school parade that everyone was to have a new school uniform the following term.

I was very happy since I had overgrown my old school uniform. My shoes were also very old and torn.

At the end of that day, we began a two-week holiday. 

When I reached home, I told my parents about the new school uniform required by the school.

Mother took me to our neighbor, Mama Sarah, the  community tailor.

Mama Sarah took my measurements. I was so excited. Mama Sarah promised to have my uniform ready the following weekend.

As we returned home, we planned to go to the market to buy my new shoes.

However, the rains were so heavy that it was not possible for us to go.

Father promised that on his way from work, he would pass by the Kongowea Market to buy the shoes for me.

I told him I needed nice black shoes, size number 5.

When Father came home, I was surprised to see that he had bought me ankle-high black boots with laces. 

They were different from the school shoes my friends had. They fitted me perfectly and I practiced walking around in them.

On Monday morning, I woke up early, ate my breakfast and went to school. Everyone looked smart in the new school uniform. 

During the morning parade, the headteacher announced, "Those of you who do not have new uniform, have one week to get it."

When we went to class, my classmates noticed how my shoes were different from everyone else's. They called me names and laughed at me for the whole week.

What hurt me most was when my desk-mate, Brian, mocked me and my shoes. He even imitated the way I walked.

I started crying until our class teacher came to class. Teacher Anyango called me out and asked what was wrong.

I explained how Brian and my classmates were bullying me because of my shoes.

Teacher Anyango talked to the class and told them to stop. She took time to explain that everyone is different and that my shoes were OK since they were black.

Brian and others were warned about bullying me  because of my shoes. Teacher Anyango told us that it  was bad behaviour to bully others.

That weekend, I told my father that I wanted new different shoes.

When he asked me why, I told him, "My classmates are treating me badly. I feel different from everyone else."

Father said, "It is OK to be different. You are different and you should be proud of this. Every child in your school is different."

He did not have money to buy me another pair of shoes for that term. He promised that he would buy them once he got some money.

With those comforting words from my father, the whole of the term I wore my black boots to school with pride.

I knew that it was OK to be different.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, an elephant and a spirit were in contest.

They wanted to know who was mightiest between them.

Each of them believed he was stronger than the other. 

They agreed to meet in the evening for a challenge.

It rained heavily that evening. The weather became extremely cold.

The elephant was asked to stop the rain. The elephant trumpeted, "Auuu Rrrrruuuuu!" 

When nothing happened, the spirit took his turn.

Instead of stopping the rain, the spirit caused loud thunder, which crashed continuously. 

The elephant trembled and fell down with his tusks in the mud.

Then the spirit asked the elephant, "Do you still doubt my power?"

The elephant answered, "I will never doubt you again!"

The elephant said, "I am the greatest among all creatures on earth. I thought I would be greater than you."

Since that contest, the elephant feared the spirit. 

When it rains, elephants hide so that the spirit cannot strike them with thunder.

------------------------------------------------------------



















------------------------------------------------------------



In a far away town, there was a smart and expensive shoe shop. 

This is the town in which I was born.

Many people came to this shoe shop, but few could afford to buy the fancy footwear. 

One day, a rich man with big feet visited the shop.

He put his money on the shop counter. 

Then, with his hands in his pockets, he walked up and down looking at the shoes.

As he came closer, I held my breath and froze.

He stretched out his hands and grabbed me.

He sat down and put me on his feet.

He had huge feet, and the smell nearly suffocated me! 

I was packed into a box.

We drove home, and he put me in a cupboard.

He wore me every day.

I made him smart and he walked with confidence. 

I had a hard life. He was always lazy about washing his feet.

In return, sometimes I pinched him, making him limp.

Eventually, I became old and broken, with scars and cracks.

He put me outside, next to the rubbish bin.

Someone picked me up for recycling, and took me to a leather workshop.

At the workshop I was made into a shiny new wallet!

I began a new life.

------------------------------------------------------------



Young boys enjoy playing football.

I enjoy rope skipping.

Anna and Sam like playing with hens as they feed them.

Some boys enjoy playing hide and seek.

Salim likes running.

Girls like swimming.

Elsie likes to do frog jump.

Some girls like to play with water.

Nelly likes sliding.

Children also like to play wedding games.

Keziah and Dona like to play with dolls.

What about you? Do you enjoy playing?

------------------------------------------------------------



Every year, we celebrate African Day at my school. This year we celebrate this day tomorrow.

My friends and I have prepared to showcase African male attire.

I took my friends to the number one tailor in town.

We call him Malume, which means uncle.

Malume knows all the styles of African men's attire.

We are all happy that he satisfied our needs.

He has made me a Malawian Khalidwe wear.

It is a cream white shirt with patterns and a matching pair of shorts.

My friend Sekani, will wear the popular African Dashiki.

It is blue with multicoloured embroidery.

Yamikani will go simple in the East African Kitenge.

It has orange and green checkered patterns.

Mayeso will showcase the West African Agbada.

His is yellow with green square patterns in the front.

Pilirani will be looking taller in Senegalese Kaftan.

It is an orange suit with blue patterns.

Siyeni has settled for a light blue Kenyan Safari suit.

He will look very official.

Majoni will wear the Eswatini Lihiya.

It is a mix of bright colours.

We are all proud of our different African attires.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Azizi. Azizi is my doll.

I like Azizi because he always smiles.

After I wake up I wash my face. Then I look for Azizi.

When I find Azizi I brush his hair.

When I eat breakfast I feed Azizi.

When I eat sweets I give one to Azizi.

But Azizi never eats his sweet. I wonder why!

I walk around the compound picking flowers.

I give a flower to Azizi. But he never says,  "Thank you."

I wash Azizi clean before my mother bathes me.

I dress Azizi in red because I love the colour red.

When I go to sleep,  I lay Azizi beside me.

------------------------------------------------------------



There were two friends, Danladi and Danjuma.

They lived in the same town.

Their friendship was strong.

Sometimes they stayed the night at each other's house.

Their children grew up to become friends as well. 

They went to school and played together.

One day, Danladi got a call from his sister. Their father was sick.

Danladi was needed in their home town.

Danladi spoke with Danjuma. 

He told him about what had happened and his plans to travel home.

The next day, Danladi prepared very early to embark on the journey. 

He asked Danjuma to escort him to the train station.

Danjuma spoke with Danladi to encourage him.

"Be strong my dear friend. I will take care of your family and business here to the best of my ability. Have a safe trip and I wish Daddy a speedy recovery."

They had been friends for a long. Danladi believed that his family and business would be in safe hands. 

He was happy leaving. "I am lucky to have a friend like Danjuma. All shall be well," he thought.

Danladi was happy. His father recovered fully and left hospital. 

He was unhappy because his friend did not keep his promise. He had even ran away with the money from his business.

Danladi was devastated by what happened. He didn't know where or how to start again. 

He didn't know if he could trust anyone again. He asked so many questions.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a hungry jackal. 

He was walking around the bush looking for food.

He came across a grapevine. 

He spotted a bunch of juicy ripe grapes hanging from a high branch.

"Those look really delicious," he thought. 

He took a few steps back so that he could make his highest jump.

The grapes were too high. 

Jackal fell on his back without even touching the bunch.

Jackal got up and went further back from his starting spot. He ran, and almost got high enough. 

But he fell even harder.

He tried again and again. But he couldn't get to the grapes. 

He kept falling until his back was very sore.

Finally, he gave up and walked away.

He stopped and looked back at the grapes. He was hungrier than ever. 

"Those grapes look really sour anyway," he thought.

------------------------------------------------------------



I'm tired of staying home all day.

I miss my friends. 

I wish we could go outside and play.

All I hear about is the coronavirus!

I wish it would go away!

Let's play with our toys.

Mum said if we stay home, God will help keep us safe.

Mr. Khumalo is sick. He had to go to the hospital.

Let's pray for him right now.

Lord Jesus,
Please heal Mr. Khumalo. 

Protect us from the coronavirus.

Thank you for being with us when we are alone and afraid.
Amen.

"Even when I must walk through the darkest valley, I fear no danger, for you are with me."

Psalm 23:4

------------------------------------------------------------



Kadogo and Juma are friends who love running. 

They run together every day.

One day they were reading maps at school. 

Juma said, "Let's run across our continent. Let's race, together with Africans from many countries!" 

"Let's go, we can do it! African unity!" cheered Kadogo.

They decided to carry a unity torch on their journey. 

They lit the torch and began to run.

The race started at the southern tip of our continent, in Cape Town, South Africa.

From South Africa they headed along the west coast. 

They ran through Namibia, Angola, DRC, Congo and Cameroon. Runners quickly joined them from these countries.

The growing group of people rested in Nigeria, in Abuja.

More runners from West Africa joined the friends as they passed through Nigeria. 

They continued together, following the River Niger.

A sandstorm in Mali made it difficult to run.

 Juma was the strongest of all of them. He led the way safely, holding the unity torch high.

At Guinea's coast in Conakry the dusty runners washed in the sea. 

Then they decided to race to Morocco through Senegal and Mauritania.

All the way, more people joined them.

At Casablanca, the runners enjoyed playing on the beaches. They made more friends.

Next, they set off across North Africa.

They ran through Algeria and Libya, and stopped in Egypt to visit the pyramids. 

Then they turned and headed east,  following the River Nile to East Africa.

They ran through deserts and national parks. 

More young people joined them in Kampala, Uganda. 

The group ran into Kenya, and headed for its coast and the city of Mombasa.

When they reached the sea, they sat on the beach and ate coconut rice with fish. 

Juma said, "Let's take the unity torch to Mount Kilimanjaro, in Tanzania."

But by this time, Juma was very tired. Just as they left Kenya, he fell down. 

The runners stopped the race. Everyone came to help Juma.

Juma passed on the torch to Kadogo. 

He said, "You can carry the torch to Mount Kilimanjaro. Let's light a flame for African unity."

After lighting a unity flame high on Kilimanjaro, the group of runners headed into southern Africa.

People cheered the runners saying, "You are our heroes. We are together!"

They stopped to swim in Lake Malawi, and rest before going to the next country. 

Kadogo said to Juma, "We've run from the farthest point in southern Africa to the farthest point in North Africa. Now we are in the south again. Our journey is ending."

The unity runners finally carried the torch to Great Zimbabwe, the ancient city of that country. 

Crowds gathered at this important place, cheering to welcome the tired runners.

"We did it!" said Kadogo. "What a race!" smiled Juma.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mbone and Akinyi were sisters. 

They lived with their parents in a beautiful house in Utafiti Town.

The schools were closing and the two girls were very happy. 

They would visit their grandmother during the holiday.

Their father gave them a ride in his car. 

On the way, they enjoyed watching wild animals and beautiful flowers.

They arrived at their grandparents' home in the afternoon. 

They ate sweet potatoes and rice.

In the evening, they visited their grandparents' flower garden. 

Akinyi, Mbone and their cousin, enjoyed plucking the flowers and tossing them around.

The following day, they took their grandparents' animals to the field. 

The animals grazed peacefully and playfully.

When they were ready to take the animals back home, one cow chased them.

Their father had to rescue them.

Life at their grandparents' home was enjoyable. 

Mbone and Akinyi played a lot. They will return the next  school holiday.

------------------------------------------------------------



I can run with it.

I can jump with it.

I can dance with it.

I can swim with it.

I can skip with it.

I can kick with it.

I can escape with it.

But I can never fly with it.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Mr Fly.

This is Mr Big Head.

Mr Big Head and Mr Fly were friends. 

One day, they went for a walk together.

They came to the edge of a river, and argued with each other. 

Mr Fly said, "You can't jump over this river!" 

"Yes, I can! It's you who can't!" replied Mr Big Head.

"You jump!" said Mr Fly. 

"No, you jump first," said Mr Big Head. 

So Mr Fly flew across the river.

Then Mr Big Head jumped into the river. 

But his head was so big that he started to sink.

Mr Fly laughed, "Hee hee!" 

But he laughed so much that his mouth tore in two from one side to the other!

------------------------------------------------------------



I see fire again.

The fire is burning brightly.

The fire can cook meat and vegetables.

The fire can keep me warm.

The orange light of the fire gives me light when it is dark.

The fire crackles and pops.

Fire is powerful and can be dangerous.

We must be careful when lighting fires or playing with fire.

------------------------------------------------------------



Isah and his family planned a vacation.

They wanted to travel to Poland for the Christmas season.

They went to the airport.

They flew to Poland in an aeroplane.

The following day, they arrived in Poland.

They visited historic places.

They visited the zoo and the beach.

The vacation was full of fun.

Afterward, they flew back to Nigeria.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ape meets Crocodile by the lake.

"Where do you live?" asks Ape,  "In the lake," says Crocodile.

"Where do you live?" asks Crocodile. "In the trees," says Ape.

"Can you swim?" asks Crocodile.

"I cannot swim," says Ape. "I can teach you."

"We are friends. Do not be afraid," says Crocodile.

"Ape,  my uncle is sick. He needs meat," says Crocodile.

Ape is very afraid. Will Crocodile eat her?

Ape wants to escape from Crocodile.

Ape has an idea.

"I will give you my heart for him," Ape promises.

"My heart is in a tree on the land," says Ape.

"Will you fetch your heart?" asks Crocodile. "Yes," says Ape.

Crocodile swims back to the land. Ape runs to the trees.

"You are not my friend. You lied!" says Crocodile.

"We are not friends. You want to eat me!" says Ape.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there were two friends, Mouth and Hand. 

They lived like brothers in one village each with his wife.

Afterwards, Mouth lost his wife.

He borrowed from his friend, Hand, what he needed to bury her.

When Mouth returned home, he discovered that  Hand's machete was missing. He went to Hand to explain and to ask for forgiveness. 

Hand did not listen to his explanation. He wanted Mouth to return the exact machete he had borrowed from him.

Mouth did not know what to do. He decided to return to the grave to see if he had forgotten the machete there. He checked everywhere, but did not find it.

In the end, he decided to dig up the grave. He was surprised when he did not find his wife's body in the grave.

Sad and worried, Mouth returned home. When he was near, he saw a dog carrying the machete he was looking for. He also heard his wife's voice saying, "This is your Helper."

Mouth took the machete and returned it to Hand. He stayed with the dog.

The dog lived with Mouth hunting for him. One day, Mouth stopped calling him 'dog' and instead called him 'Helper'.

They lived happily for a long time until friendship between Mouth and Hand was restored.

Later, Hand wanted to eat meat, but he did not have a hunting dog to help him. He went to his friend Mouth to ask for his dog.

Mouth did not hesitate to give him Helper. He warned Hand not call him dog, but Helper.

Hand went with Helper everywhere he wanted. Everything he wanted done, Helper did it.

He sent Helper to the forest to hunt. Hand was very happy with Helper's work.

One day when they were in the forest, Helper got lost. Hand called him, "Helper! Helper! Where are you?"

He got tired calling and angrily, he said, "This dog is so stupid." At that moment, Helper appeared and said, "You called me, dog! I'm going away." And left.

Hand returned home without Helper. He went to his friend Mouth to inform him that Helper was lost. Mouth was not happy. He told Hand to bring his Helper back but Hand was unable to do so.

Since that day, hand has been mouth's helper.

------------------------------------------------------------



She carried me for nine months.

She made sure that I grew up healthy and strong.

She put me to bed every night.

She made sure that I woke up early every morning.

She took me shopping at the market.

And allowed me to choose my own shoes and clothes.

She counselled me whenever I went wrong.

I will never forget her love in my life.

------------------------------------------------------------



Heeeee! There is a beautiful cow at home.

It has only one horn,  and no tail.

It is fat,  with a big stomach.

It is a powerful cow.

The shepherd loves this cow the most.

When the other cattle graze,  this one eats alone.

This cow is a fighter. Other cows leave it alone.

If you met such a cow,  what would you do?

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time in a big palace, there lived a king and his beautiful daughter, the princess.

Elephant lived in a house on one side of the palace.

Chameleon lived on the other side.

At this time, there was a terrible drought across the land.

The king had an idea and called his two neighbours to the palace.

The kind said to Elephant and Chameleon, "I want you to stomp on the ground with your feet until water comes out."

The king promised the princess in marriage to the one who succeeded.

Chameleon had no hope since he was very small. Elephant was extremely happy since he was so big and powerful.

Elephant went to the field and started stomping on the ground.

A lot of dust came, but no water. Elephant stomped on the ground until water was almost coming out, but he was too tired.

He gave Chameleon a chance to try.

Chameleon started stomping on the ground. After a short while, water came out.

People could not believe their eyes!

So the King gave the beautiful princess to Chameleon. 

Elephant went home annoyed.

------------------------------------------------------------



JJ was 12 years old. His father used to send him to the nearby butchery to buy meat. 

It was an activity he loved because meat was his favorite meal.

One evening, JJ was sent to buy a goat's head for soup. On his way home, he thought of eating the meat.

He sat under a big tree and thought of what to do next. It was getting dark.

He decided to roast the meat. He lit a fire and put the goat's head on it. Suddenly, a dark figure emerged in the distance. 

JJ thought it was his father. He began rehearsing for an excuse to save himself from punishment.

The image appeared to grow bigger as it approached him. 

JJ became very frightened. The creature had four legs and a big tail. 

JJ thought, "This is no human being, it is an animal!"

He had no time to climb up the tree. The animal began running towards him. 

JJ dropped the roasting goat's head and ran towards the bushes.

It was a big leopard. The leopard growled and continued chasing after JJ. 

He screamed as he entered into a thicket.

It was a race for his life. Though he ran fast, he could not see his way as it had grown dark. 

All the while, he screamed for help.

His father was terrified that his son had not arrived home. He began looking for him. 

JJ bumped into someone. It was his father. He was holding a sharp machete and a torch.

He slashed the leopard's legs and disabled it. JJ was happy to live to tell the story. 

He later apologized to his father and promised never to repeat the same mistake.

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago, three girls went out to collect wood.

It was a hot day so they went down to the river to swim. 

They played and splashed and swam in the water.

Suddenly, they realised that it was late. 

They hurried back to the village.

When they were nearly home, Nozibele put her hand to her neck. She had forgotten her necklace! 

"Please come back with me!" she begged her friends. But her friends said it was too late.

Nozibele went back to the river alone. She found her necklace and began hurrying home. 

But, she got lost in the dark.

In the distance she saw light coming from a hut. 

She walked quickly towards it and knocked at the door.

To her surprise, a dog opened the door and said,  "What do you want?" 

"I'm lost and I need a place to sleep," said Nozibele. 

"Come in, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele went in.

The dog said, "Cook for me!" "But I've never cooked for a dog before," Nozibele answered. 

"Cook, or I'll bite you!" said the dog. Nozibele cooked some food for the dog.

Then the dog said, "Make the bed for me!" Nozibele answered, "I've never made a bed for a dog." 

"Make the bed, or I'll bite you!" the dog said. Nozibele made the bed.

Every day she had to cook and sweep and wash for the dog. 

Then one day the dog said, "Nozibele, today I have to visit some friends. Sweep the house, cook the food and wash my things before I come back."

As soon as the dog left, Nozibele took three hairs from her head. 

She put one hair under the bed, one behind the door, and one in the kraal. Then she ran home as fast as she could.

When the dog came back, he looked for Nozibele. "Nozibele, where are you?" he shouted. 

"I'm here, under the bed," said the first hair. "I'm here, behind the door," said the second hair. "I'm here, in the kraal," said the third hair.

The dog knew that Nozibele had tricked him. He ran and ran all the way to the village. But Nozibele's brothers were waiting there with big sticks. 

The dog turned and ran away and has never been seen since.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mod the toad was tired of living in water.

"Be careful," said the turtle. "Your skin will dry out."

But Mod was curious. She hopped away.

She looked all around.

She met a purple chameleon next to a puddle of water.

The chameleon started turning pink! Mod jumped away.

Then she saw a hyena starting a fire.

The fire spread around Mod. She was afraid.

The fire burned her skin. She jumped back,  into the puddle.

But her skin was already full of blisters.

Mod found a home under a rock. Her new skin was dry and rough.

Now only frogs have smooth skin and live near water.

------------------------------------------------------------



I like to read.

Who can I read to?

My sister is asleep.

Who can I read to?

My mother and grandmother are busy.

Who can I read to?

My father and grandfather are busy.

Who can I read to? I can read to myself!

------------------------------------------------------------



In a city, there lived a beautiful girl whose name was Ella.

She was tall, dark skinned, with black hair. She had captivating eyes.

Ella had a beautiful set of pearl-white teeth. She was a kind and hardworking girl. She never gave her parents problems.

The only thing that bothered her parents was her curiosity. She asked very unusual questions.

For example, when her pencil broke, Ella asked her mother, "Mommy, did my pencil go to heaven?" 

Sometimes her parents did not know how to respond to Ella's many questions so, they kept quiet.

However, Ella's brother, Henry, always listened to Ella's questions. When it was raining she asked, "Is the rain in the cloud crying?" 

Her brother laughed and answered  "No!" He went on to explain that rain falls when vapour in the atmosphere cools.

One day, she decided to go out for a stroll. As she walked, she saw an apple tree and accidentally broke it's branch. 

"Oh, no! It needs a doctor," Ella said. Surprisingly, the tree answered. "Yes, I need a doctor."

Ella was shocked and asked, "How can you talk?" The tree replied, "I am a tree that can answer all your questions." 

Ella asked again, "Why can't the boy hear you?" The tree replied, "Because he did not ask."

Ella ran to her brother and told him what happened. Both of them quickly ran  to the tree. Henry asked, "Are you real?" 

The tree replied, "I am real." They both danced with joy.

Since then, they never disturbed their parents again. 

Any time they had a question, they went to the apple tree and it answered their questions.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a goat called Igobe. Igobe was the king of farm animals and birds. He lived a good life. 

One day, Igobe called all the animals and birds to a meeting.

"My friends, I have called you because I had a dream," said Igobe the king. 

All the animals and birds kept quiet. They listened to their king carefully.

"I dreamed that there was no food or water left in the land. Many of our relatives died!" said king Igobe. 

When the animals and the birds heard the dream, they were worried. "What shall we do?" asked the cat.

The hen and the duck had an idea. They said, "Let each one of us bring food and put it in the king's store." 

All the animals agreed with this idea.

King Igobe made a rule. He said, "Get ropes. Tie up anyone who does not bring food to my store. Then carry him to me."

But, soon after this, it was time for a new king to rule over the farm. 

All the animals and birds met and elected the cat as their new king.

But the goat refused to agree that the cat was king. 

"I'm the king. There is no other king. I can't obey any other animal," said the goat.

The animals took food to the new king's store. But the goat did not take anything. 

"When the goat was king, we all obeyed him. Now he does not want to obey our new king. What shall we do?" asked the cow.

All the domestic animals and birds were angry. 

"He thinks he is different to us," they all muttered.

The dog said, "I helped him when he was king. I did not sleep at night. I was always with him, ready to help."

The sheep said, "I gave him my wool to cover his children."

The pig said, "When he was king, he told his friends that I eat a lot. But I was often in his garden digging and weeding his maize and millet."

The sheep asked, "What did he say? That you eat a lot? Did he think that he will be king forever?" 

Then the sheep added, "Let him understand that he is not king any more. I don't know why he thinks he is so important."

All the animals laughed and agreed that the goat must take food to the new king. 

King Cat ordered the goat to come to him.

When the animals went to fetch the goat, he was sitting on a chair with his legs crossed. 

"I shall not go to the cat. There is no other king except me. When you become a king, you are always a king," said the goat.

"We will tie you with ropes and take you to the new king," said the sheep.

So the cow tied the goat to her tail. She then pulled him to the king. 

The sheep, the duck, the dog, the pig, and the cock cheered as the cow pulled the goat. They all shouted,  "Take this stubborn goat to our new king!"

From that time, every goat refuses to move when it is pulled. 

It thinks that you are taking it to the king's court.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long long ago when the earth was new, great mountains covered the world like a blanket, and tall trees spiked the sky.

In this world, there was a deep dark pool, silent and cold.

At the bottom of this pool were two snakes. 

One had thick strongly patterned coils, and the other was smaller and more delicate.

Then one day, there was a great storm.

A flash of lightning pierced right to the bottom of the pool. The waters parted for a moment. The snakes saw the earth above, full of colours and shapes and feathered creatures.

When the waters closed again, the snakes could not forget the beauty they had seen.

"We cannot stay in this dark cold pool any longer," they said to each other. "Let us go up and see the earth above." 

"How will we live on earth?" said the smaller snake. "Will we crawl on our bellies?"

"The birds of the air will not laugh at us for being so low," said her friend. "We will not crawl, we will walk!" 

Very slowly the snakes uncoiled themselves. Close together they began to swim up, up, to the light above.

And as they reached the surface of the water, a strange thing happened. The tips of their tails split into two. They grew limbs with feet and toes. 

From just beneath their heads grew two arms with hands and fingers.

They were no longer snakes, but Man and Woman.

"We will make our home in the hills," said Woman. "Each morning we will see the sun rise and feel it warm on our backs." 

"We will look after the grass and the trees," said Man. "And be friends with Bird and Beast."

"Come," said First Man. "I will," said First Woman. 

And they walked out together into their new world.

------------------------------------------------------------



This book is to showcase the various types of food we eat during school break in Kanvilli Nuriya Primary School.

First we have the 'waakye'. It is a food prepared using rice and beans mixed together. We eat it with stew.

We also have a delicious local meal we called 'wasawasa'. It is a popular food eaten in Dagbon.

It is also eaten in some west African countries such as Burkina Faso.

'Wasawasa' is made from dried yam peelings called 'jaling', which have been grounded into flour and steamed. 

It is mostly eaten with spicy sauces and sometimes ganished with cooked beans.

We also have the 'yama'. Yama is also prepared using maize flour.

It is also eaten with spicy grounded groundnut powder mixed with salt and pepper.

Then, we also have our favourite called 'nyombeika'. It is also eaten in Burkina Faso. It is prepared using bean leaves mixed with grounded maize. 

It is very nutritious because of the bean leaves. We love to eat it with shea butter oil.

Let me end my story and eat my fried yam before going back to class.

What foods do you eat in your community? I hope you love the foods we have here!

------------------------------------------------------------



Thuli has short hair.

Anna has long hair.

Cathy has the longest hair.

Zama has plaited her hair.

Baba has a beard.

Zanele has combed her hair.

Thabo has cut his hair.

Themba has shaved his hair.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon time, a lion wanted to come out of the bush. 

He wanted to have a human as a friend.

And so the lion and the man became friends.

They ate together and shared meat. The lion realised that the man was a meat lover. 

It began to fear that the man would kill it.

The lion feared that perhaps the man might spear it with his spears. 

The man feared that the lion might eat him at night when he slept.

One night, the man dreamed that the lion was moving towards him slowly, trying to eat him.

The man took up his spear, shouting, "If you want to eat me, then I will spear you." 

The lion woke up and ran out, "I said this man will one day kill me."

From that day, the lion and the man were no longer friends. 

The lion will kill a human whenever it finds one. And humans will kill a lion if they can.

That is why it is said: if someone wants friendship with you, you should first know about that person's character. 

You should know if you can be together peacefully.

------------------------------------------------------------



I peel the potatoes.

I chop a cabbage.

I grate the carrots.

I wash the beans.

I cut the butternut.

I chop the spinach.

My mom chops the onions.

Onions make me cry when they are chopped.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a particular year, the dry season was too long and a drought hit hard. As a result, all the rivers dried up, except the River of Blessings. 

All the animals were thirsty and called for a meeting.

Camel was the first to speak, "As you know, we are very thirsty and all the rivers have dried up, except the River of Blessings. But it is very far away. What do we do?"

Horse suggested, "Some of us can go to the River of Blessings. We can drink and bring water for the others." 

Cow answered, "It is too far. By the time we returned from the river those left behind would be dead."

Sheep said, "Maa! Maaa! I will go to the River of Blessings and drink water." 

Goat jumped up and said, "Meee, meee! I will also go to the River of Blessings." 

Chicken said, "Keer, ker ker ker! I too will go to the River of Blessings.

All the animals wanted to go. Camel led the way. 

Going there was not easy. Guinea fowl was last in the line. "My friends, I can no longer go to the River of Blessings," he said.

Chicken swallowed Guinea fowl.

They continued. Chicken said, "Please, I am tired, I no longer want to go to the River of Blessings." 

Sheep swallowed Chicken.

As the journey continued, Sheep also became tired. 

Sheep said, "I am tired. I do not want to go to the River of Blessings anymore." 

Goat swallowed Sheep.

Soon, Goat was too tired to continue going to the river. Horse turned and swallowed Goat. 

When Horse became too tired to go to the river, Cow swallowed him.

When Cow finally could not continue, Camel turned and swallowed her.

Being the only animal left, Camel did her best to reach the River of Blessings. 

Camel finally arrived, very tired.

On arrival, Camel lay down and vomited Cow. 

Cow vomited Horse. Horse vomited Goat. 

Goat vomited Sheep. Sheep vomited Chicken and Chicken vomited Guinea fowl.

And that is how all the animals managed to drink water from the River of Blessings.

------------------------------------------------------------



It was very early in the morning.

I woke up early to prepare for school.

As I dressed up, I thought, "How will I look like in my school uniform?"

My father escorted me to school.

I joined other pupils in class for my first lesson in school.

The next teacher to come to class was teacher Mary. 

She was tall.

When I grow up, I want to be like my teacher.

I love going to school very much.

------------------------------------------------------------



Meet Ndalo. He is 10 years old and in Grade 5 at the village school. Ndalo always comes top of his class. "What's his secret?" his schoolmates ask themselves.

"He's excellent in reading and writing. How does he do it?" they wonder. Ndalo tells them it is because he reads lots of books. While they waste their time doing nothing, he spends all his free time reading.

Ndalo sometimes earns R80 a week in pocket money. He spends most of the pocket money on books at the second-hand book shop in his village.

So how does Ndalo earn enough pocket money for these books? Read on to find out.

Meet Pendo, the family's milking cow. She produces over 20 litres of milk per day. Ndalo's father sells the milk.

A cow needs food and water, and time to graze in the veld. So each day after school Ndalo helps with this work. Ndalo's father gives him pocket money for the work he does. And it is this money that Ndalo saves to buy books each week.

First, Ndalo gives Pendo a bunch of carrots. He gives her exactly eight carrots a day. Each day he picks the carrots from his father's vegetable patch, enough for a day at a time.

You can work it out. You will find that Pendo eats nearly 60 carrots a week. Can you tell exactly how many?

After that, Ndalo takes Pendo to graze in the fields. His father warned him to watch the time and not give Pendo more than three quarters of an hour to graze.

Pendo usually starts grazing at about quarter past two, so that Ndalo can take her back to the milking shed at 3 o'clock. In winter when it gets dark earlier, Ndalo may start grazing earlier, around half past one.

Next Ndalo gives Pendo water. Without water Pendo won't produce milk, no matter how much Ndalo feeds her. Ndalo fetches buckets of water from the village pump because there isn't one nearby.

Pendo's trough holds about 30 litres of water. Ndalo's bucket only holds 5 litres. So to fill the trough Ndalo has to make many trips. Can you work out how many trips he has to make?

Then, Ndalo takes Pendo to his father to get her daily 12 kg bag of grain. Ndalo calculates that's almost 90 kg a week.

Each bag costs R39. Ndalo works out the cost of grain for each week. First he works out the cost of 7 bags at R40, which makes R280. Then he subtracts R7 to get R273. "That's over R1 000 a month!" Ndalo estimates. Is he correct?

Ndalo's father milks Pendo twice a day. She produces about 24 litres of milk a day, so about 12 litres for each milking.

Sometimes Ndalo helps with the milking but it is not as easy as it looks. "One day," he thinks to himself, "I will have my own cows and I will have to do all the milking myself."

His father pours the milk from the big bucket into smaller two litre cans or one litre bottles. He then sells the milk for R8 a litre.

Once a week Ndalo's father donates 25 litres of milk to the school feeding scheme. Each child gets a quarter litre of this milk. That means that 100 children get milk on this day.

For each litre of milk sold, his father gives Ndalo 50c. That doesn't sound like a lot, but if his father sells 24 litres a day, it adds up to quite a bit. Can you tell how much?

Ndalo saves his money until Saturday when he makes a trip to the book shop. Each book costs less than R10, so in a good week, he can buy quite a few.

Ndalo also loves to drink Pendo's milk. His father says that milk helps to build strong bones and teeth and makes a person fit and healthy.

So by drinking milk and eating lots of vegetables from his father's garden, Ndalo is strong and healthy. He seldom gets sick and never goes hungry.

Ndalo never forgets to thank Pendo at the end of each day. He rewards her with extra carrots or spinach leaves that he finds lying around the garden.

"Thank you Pendo, you are my best friend! It is thanks to you that I am strong, healthy and clever. If not for you I would never be able to buy all the books that help me be top of my class."

------------------------------------------------------------



I love forests!

Last week I went to Kibale forest.

I saw many trees. 

I saw Fig, Muvule, Palm, and Ebony trees.

I saw chimpanzees, baboons, and monkeys.

I saw different birds. 

I saw crested cranes, eagles, and owls.

I laughed when I saw a big elephant with a little tail.

I saw so many different animals, birds, and plants.

Kibale forest is a good place to visit. 

I love forests! Do you?

------------------------------------------------------------



A beautiful woman lived in the village of Pila. 

Her name was Mimidoo. 

People also called her, Beauty.

Mimidoo married Nator, a farmer. 

Mimidoo and Nator always worked together on the farm.

Many rich men from the city came to the village. They wanted to take Mimidoo from Nator, her poor husband. 

They came with money and many gifts. 

Mimidoo rejected them.

One day, the king also sent his messengers. 

They came with great gifts for Mimidoo. 

He also sent money to Nator.

"Why is the king sending us gifts?" Nator asked.

"He wants to ask you two for a favor," one of the messengers replied. 

"How can the king ask a favor from poor farmers?" Mimidoo asked.

The king invited them to the palace. 

"I will give you a lot of money, if you let me marry your beautiful wife," the king told Nator.

 "I want you to be my queen," he told Mimidoo.

Mimidoo and Nator fell on their knees. 

Nator begged, "I know you can kill me and marry her. But you are a good king. I love my wife. Please, don't separate us."

"Long live the king! I love my husband. I love working on the farm. Please, don't separate us," Mimidoo pleaded.
 
The king was so pleased to know that he had subjects who were not greedy.

He built a mansion for them.

------------------------------------------------------------



I enjoyed my 2023 December holiday.

My mother prepared rice and stew.

The aroma of the stew made me anxiously wait for it to be ready.

While the food was on the fire, I kept checking it.

I enjoyed reading, playing, eating, and cooking.

I enjoyed cooking with my mother and siblings.

I enjoyed walking outside breathing in fresh air.

On the 29, we traveled to Ediba, our rural village.

We ate lots of rice.

The next day, we prepared to travel back to Calabar. My Daddy did not travel with us because we did not have enough money.

Although it was tough, we were okay.

On the 31, my siblings and some of my cousins visited my grandparents. We went to Church for cross over night.

The next day, we returned to Calabar.

------------------------------------------------------------



There once lived a man called Malasile. He had a very good friend called Wetsakhulya. 

These friends always shared whatever they had. Sometimes Malasile even forgot about his family.

Then one day Malasile wondered to himself, "If I ever fell sick, would my friend Wetsakhulya help me?"

Malasile thought of a plot to test the depth of their friendship. 

He bled blood from a cow and put it in a pot with a lid. He put the pot in his room.

Malasile stayed in his room for four days and four nights. There was a foul smell of rotting blood coming from the room. The bad smell spread through the whole house and compound. 

Malasile asked his wife, "Tell the family and my friend Wetsakhulya that I have a terrible disease and will die soon."

When his family and friend were in his compound, Malasile removed the lid from the pot of rotting blood.

The smell from the room was sickening.

Soon enough Wetsakhulya began to walk away. With his hand on his nose, holding his breath, he cried, "I'm shocked! My friend is rotting away!" 

Wetsakhulya left the compound.

But the family forced the door of Malasile's room open. 

They wanted to know what type of disease was killing Malasile.

The family found Malasile sitting on his bed, grinning as he sucked his millet beer. He pointed to a huge pot of malwa that he had brought for them to enjoy. 

"I appreciate your concern," said Malasile to his family. "I know now who I can rely on."

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time in a village, there lived a boy named Thabo.

Thabo was friends with a girl called Lerato. 

They were neighbours.

One day, they went to get water.

When they were near to the spring, they saw a cow lying there. 

They sat down and talked about how they could play with it.

Then Thabo started to imitate the cow. 

"Muuu, muuu, muuuuuuu!" he said in a clear, loud voice.

Until the cow turned to look at them. 

Suddenly, Lerato got a fright. Thabo realised that she was scared.

Thabo said, "Let's go to this cow and hit it. It will run away and then we can get water."

"Thabo, I'm afraid!" said Lerato trembling.

Thabo went first. Lerato went slowly. 

They tried to hit the cow, but it didn't move.

Thabo said, "Lerato, you can stay here. I will fetch the water."

Lerato agreed.

Thabo scooped the water into the first bucket.

While he was scooping the water into the other bucket, the cow stood up. 

She picked up Thabo with one horn, and threw him onto her neck.

Thabo shouted, "Joo, jooo, jooooo!"

Lerato burst out laughing, she could not stop.

The cow said, "Mmuuu, mmuuu, muuuuuu!"

When at last Lerato stopped laughing, she ran home as quickly as she could. 

When she arrived, she found Ma Mathabo sweeping outside.

She said, "Ma Ma Ma, the co co cow has taken Thabo!" 

Lerato was panting.

Ma Mathabo dropped her broom and ran. 

What do you think happened next?

------------------------------------------------------------



A woman with her baby went into the forest. 

She went to pick fruit.

In the forest she found a tree with ripe fruit.

She put down her sleeping baby and climbed the tree.

An erotot from another community came by. He saw the baby. He was surprised. 

He asked himself, "Where is the mother?"

He bent down. 

The sound of the chains on his neck woke the baby.

He let the baby play with his chains. 

The baby laughed as he played.

The woman looked down to see why the baby was laughing. 

She saw the stranger.

She was so afraid that she dropped her bag of fruit.

The erotot looked up. 

He said, "Don't be afraid. I'm only playing with your beautiful baby."

So the woman came down from the tree.

The erotot took off one of his chains. 

He gave it to the baby. "Here is a gift for you," he said.

"Go home with your baby. Tell your husband to move to a more peaceful village. Your baby has given me peace," said the erotot.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mzi lives in a thatched house.

Thulani lives in a square house.

This house is a rectangle.

The roof of this house is a triangle.

This man is building his own house.

This house is new.

This house is old.

I wish I lived in this house.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Jackal felt sick.

He tried drinking water, but that made his stomach swollen. 

He tried eating grass, but still his stomach hurt.

Jackal decided that only the medicine of humans would help him. 

So he dragged himself to the clinic in the town.

"Auwwwh," said the nurse when she saw the bedraggled jackal. "This place is for sick people, not animals. Go away!" she shouted. 

Now, Jackal was a clever animal, so as sick as he was, he made a plan.

He asked a boy who was waiting outside the clinic,  to get him the medicine from the nurse. 

"If you do this for me, I will give you a fresh fat bird every day," Jackal told the boy, whose name was Ernst.

Ernst was hungry and anyway, he felt sorry for the sick jackal, with his drooping whiskers and his tail hanging like a rag.

So Ernst went into the clinic, got the medicine, and gave it to the jackal. Jackal licked up all the medicine. 

Immediately, Jackal's ears stood up and his tail lifted. Then he run away over the veld without even looking back at Ernst.

"Hey, what about my fresh fat bird?" Ernst shouted.

The jackal just ran away faster. That night Ernst and his parents slept with hunger.

But when they awoke the next morning, they found a fat sandgrouse on their doorstep. 

And the next day too, and every day until the boy grew up.

Ernst never saw the jackal again. 

He grew up to become an animal doctor, and kept a picture of a jackal on his wall.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Frog and Snake were good friends. 

Their homes were near each other and their children played together.

One day, Frog said to Snake, "My friend I want to visit my mother next week. Would you like to go with me?"

"I would be happy to go," Snake answered. 

"Very good, then let's prepare for a long journey," replied Frog. "We also need to find someone to look after our homes while we are away," she added.

They asked Monkey to help since he was good and responsible. 

Monkey accepted.

During the next few days, the two friends were busy making arrangements for the journey. 

Frog collected white ants and packed them in a big sack. Her mother loved to eat white ants.

The day arrived and the two friends set off at dawn. 

Soon they reached the thick forest. As they entered the forest, a group of angry squirrels gathered to attack them.

Snake was so afraid that she started shaking. 

She hissed and hissed but the fierce squirrels kept on coming closer.

Just as the squirrels were about to attack them, Frog croaked very loudly. 

The squirrels got such a fright that they ran away.

When the two friends finally arrived at Frog's mother's place, they were hungry and tired. 

Frog's mother gave them a mat to sit on while she was preparing food.

When the food was ready, Frog and Snake washed and sat down to eat.

Before they started eating, Frog said, "Snake you can't eat while lying down. That is bad manners. Please sit up properly otherwise my mother will be offended."

Snake tried very hard to sit up like the frogs, but she failed.

Meanwhile Frog and her mother started eating the food.

"I can't sit up properly," Snake pleaded with Frog. 

But Frog would not listen.

Snake was so upset that she decided to go back to her home. 

She did not say farewell to the frogs.

On the way home, she made a plan to teach Frog a lesson!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Nakehi and his wife went to visit Nipapariya and his wife.

When the couple arrived,  Nipapariya and his wife graciously welcomed them.

They killed a chicken and cooked it.

And they all ate together.

The next week, Nipapariya and his wife went to visit Nakehi and his wife.

When they arrived, Nakehi was not at home.

He had gone out to set a trap to catch a francolin.

When Nakehi returned, he saw his friends. He was so happy.

He went to see what his wife was cooking.

She was cooking beans.

He kicked over the beans and stormed out of the house.

He told his friends about a trap that he had set near a nest of francolin eggs.

As they were talking, Nakehi heard the sound of a francolin calling. 

The call told him something.

The bird was caught in the trap!

Nakehi jumped up, put his knife in his belt, and ran off to catch the francolin.

Trembling with excitement, he grabbed the francolin in one hand.

With his other hand he gathered up the eggs.

Nakehi headed home, full of pride.

But as he walked, his knife was cutting away at his belt.

Proudly Nakehi walked up to his house.

At that moment, his belt snapped and his loincloth fell to his ankles.

He tried to grab the cloth but let go of the bird.

The francolin flew away. 

The eggs lay broken on the ground.

Nipapariya and his wife laughed and laughed.

Then they all ate what was left of the beans.

------------------------------------------------------------



I peel the potatoes.

I chop a cabbage.

I grate the carrots.

I wash the beans.

I cut the butternut.

I chop the spinach.

My mom chops the onions.

Onions make me cry when they are chopped.

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived a set of twin brothers called Elephant and Hippo. 

One day, Fate came and gave them two choices. "Choose blindness or leprosy," Fate ordered. 

Hippo wanted to be clever. He quickly chose leprosy so as to keep using his eyes. Elephant chose blindness.

Hippo became an angry boy because of the leprosy. Blindness gave Elephant patience. Elephant needed help but Hippo treated him badly. 

Then Elephant found a magical Stick, which helped him to move around. They whispered secrets to each other. Stick helped Elephant to fight enemies.

Because Hippo lost his fingers and toes he also needed help. Elephant was kind to him. 

When food was served, Hippo needed Elephant to cut the food and place it on his fingerless palms. Hippo was very unhappy.

One morning, their mother served hot yams. Because they were hungry, the boys did not wait for the yams to cool.

Hippo put his palms together and they looked like a plate. He asked, "Put my share here for me."

The yam was so hot that it burned their palms. Hippo moved his hands up and down, to cool his palms. The yam fell on the sand.

Elephant moved his own yam from one hand to the other without it falling. Hippo was annoyed.

"Help me pick up my yam, please," Hippo asked Elephant. 

"You know I cannot see it," Elephant replied.
"Give me your hand, I will show you," Hippo said.

Elephant found the yam, and blew the sand off it. He gave it to Hippo.

In the evening, their mother gave them pounded yam, and four pieces of meat. Elephant quickly touched the meat and counted the pieces with his fingers. 

Hippo did not notice Elephant counting the meat.

Hippo tried to steal a piece of meat but he dropped it. When it was time to share the meat, Elephant asked, "Were there not four pieces of meat?" 

"There were three," Hippo lied. "There were four," Elephant insisted. "Are you really blind?" Hippo asked.

One day, they were hungry but their mother was away. "Let us go and play to forget our hunger," suggested Hippo. 

Elephant agreed, so Hippo said, "Let us swim in the river." He knew Elephant could not swim. He planned to kill his brother!

Elephant and Stick followed Hippo.

On the way, Hippo went into the forest. He picked up a heavy stone and put it under his arm. He grunted as he picked up the stone. He was still grunting as they walked to the river. 

"Why is he grunting like that?" Elephant asked Stick.

When they reached the river, Hippo said, "I will jump in first and help you to swim." 

He moved away from Elephant. He lifted the stone and threw it into the river. 

"That sound is too small for the size of Hippo," Stick whispered in Elephant's ear.

Elephant asked Stick to find out more. He started swinging Stick round and round. Stick hit Hippo very hard. "Ayei!" Hippo cried and jumped into the river. 

The magical Stick turned Hippo into a water animal. He turned Elephant into a land animal and became Elephant's trunk.

------------------------------------------------------------



In an attractive village nestled among lush greenery, there lived a kind-hearted woman named Lady Amelia.

Her cottage, surrounded by a blossoming garden, was a haven of flora. But it was her love for butterflies that truly set her apart.

Lady Amelia spent her days tending to her garden, nurturing a variety of flowers that attracted colourful butterflies.

Among them, Beauty stood out with her extraordinary beauty. Her wings shimmered like shining jewels in the sunlight, captivating anyone who beheld her graceful flight.

Lady Amelia said, "Isn't nature wonderful, Beauty? Together, we create a symphony of colours and life."

One fateful morning, as Lady Amelia admired Beauty's delicate dance among the flowers, a shadow fell over the garden. The Collector had arrived, drawn by rumours of the rare butterfly's existence.

With a net in hand and greed in his eyes, he ignored Lady Amelia's protests and lunged to capture Beauty. Collector Jabu inquired, "Ah, what do we have here? A rare butterfly indeed."

Beauty fluttered desperately, her delicate wings flashing in the sunlight as she tried to escape from the net.

Lady Amelia, determined to protect her beloved butterfly, stood in the way, pleading with the Collector to release her Beauty.

"Help me, Lady Amelia! I don't want to be trapped!"

But the wicked Collector was unmoved by her pleas, driven only by his insatiable greed.

Beauty's life hung in the balance, her freedom threatened by the old man's ruthless pursuit.

Lady Amelia begged, "Please, sir! Beauty belongs here, free butterfly among the flowers."

In a moment of desperation, Lady Amelia racked her brain for a solution. And then it struck her to trade.

She offered something of equal value to the Collector in exchange for Beauty's freedom.

Leading the Collector to a hidden part of her garden, Lady Amelia revealed a hidden treasure. A breath taking flower, rumoured to possess magical properties.

Its petals shimmered with glassy light, casting a spell of wonder over all who beheld it.

Lady Amelia implored, "Behold, a treasure beyond measure. Would you consider this in exchange for Beauty's freedom?"

Lady Amelia told the Collector the amazing wonders that the magical flower holds. The Collector seemed very interested in the flower while still holding his net.

He thought, "This is a specials treasure that can change my life and I can make a lot of money."

Surprised by its beauty, the Collector accepted the offer, releasing Beauty from his grasp.

With Beauty safe once more, Lady Amelia watched as she soared into the sky, her colorful wings shimmering with gratitude.

The Collector said, "A fair exchange, indeed. Farewell, beautiful butterfly."

The wicked old man, satisfied with his new treasure, left.

He was unaware of the true magic he had encountered in Lady Amelia's garden. The power of love and kindness to change the mans heart.

As he went, he thought, "Another addition to my collection. How fortunate."

In the heart of a kind-hearted woman and the wings of a magical butterfly, there existed a beauty beyond compare. A beauty born of love, compassion, and the wonders of the natural world.

Lady Amelia whispered, "Together forever, my dear Beauty. Our bond is as strong as the wings that carry us."

------------------------------------------------------------



A a

A is for arm, apple, and ant.

Ants are tiny and strong insects. An ant can carry something that is much heavier than itself.

B b

B is for banana, ball, and bird.

Birds have wings and beaks, and lay eggs. Some birds are beautiful, some birds are boring!

C c

C is for car, cut, and cat.

Cats are clean and quiet animals. They catch rats and other pests.

D d

D is for door, drum, and duck.

Ducks waddle and ducks quack. They have webbed feet and a beak.

E e

E is for elephant, eagle, and egg.

Eggs can be found in nests, and kitchens. Eggs are nutritious and good to eat.

F f

F is for fan, food, and fish.

Fishes only live in water. Their fins help them to swim and their gills help them to breathe.

G g

G is for gate, girl, and goat.

Goats eat grass and hay. They have large stomachs that are made of four parts.

H h

H is for house, horse, and honey.

Bees make honey from flowers. We use honey in food, and in medicine.

I i

I is for ink, ice, and island.

An island is a piece of land with water all around it, in a lake, river or sea.

J j

J is for jump, jug, and juice.

We get juice from fruits and vegetables. Juice tastes sweet, sour, bitter or bland.

K k

K is for kettle, kite, and knee.

The thigh bone and the lower leg bones join together at the knee.

L l

L is for lorry, lion, and lemon.

Lemons are from the citrus family of fruit. You can make lemonade with lemons.

M m

M is for money, mango, and monkey.

Monkeys live in trees and on the ground.

N n

N is for nest, nose, and night.

Night is the time of darkness from sunset to sunrise.

O o

O is for oven, oval, and orange.

Orange is the name of a colour, and it is a nutritious fruit.

P p

P is for pet, pan, and peanut.

Peanuts are packed with protein and healthy fat.

Q q

Q is for quail, queen, and quack.

In English, the letter 'q' is always with her friend, the letter 'u'.

R r

R is for rat, road, and rabbit.

A rabbit's teeth grow all the time, but wear down as it chews food.

S s

S is for sand, see, and scorpion.

All scorpions have a sting with poison in it. Some scorpions have a deadly sting.

T t

T is for top, toy, and tea.

Tea is an important crop in Africa. Kenya grows the most tea.

U u

U is for unicorn, uniform, and umbrella.

Have you ever seen a unicorn wearing a uniform, with an umbrella?

V v

V is for violin, van, and violet.

Violet is one of the colours of the rainbow.

W w

W is for wax, wind, and water.

Water has three forms. Liquid in a river. Solid in a block of ice. A gas in a cloud.

X x

Words that begin with x are rare. 

X is for ox, axe, and x-ray.

An x-ray is a picture of parts inside our bodies.

Y y

Y is for yam, yellow, and YOU!

You are a star for reading this far.

Z z

Z is for zoo, zebra and zip or zippers.

Zips come in many colours and sizes. Does your uniform have a zip in it?

------------------------------------------------------------



A lungfish is black or brown and slippery to touch. Its meat is delicious!
 
Lungfishes live in rivers. In the dry season they can burrow underground when there is not enough water.
 
Unlike other types of fish, the lungfish can breathe air.

One day, my father went to graze our cattle. I did not want to remain at home because I love to spend time with my father.

When we arrived at the pasture, my father relaxed under a cedar tree as he was tired. I looked after the cattle.

There is a pool next to the pasture. I heard a sound coming from the pool. "Hub!"
 
At first, I thought it was one of our calves burping!
 
"Hub!" I heard it again, coming from the mud. "Wow! What a sound! Could it be a lungfish?" I wondered.

My father had also heard the sound. He ran over to me. 
 
"Where did that sound come from?" he asked. My father looked around but did not find the fish. 
 
He complained, "Lungfishes can 'hub' and then go silent again."
 
We waited, but the fish did not 'hub'.

At dusk we returned home with our cattle. 
 
I tied up each cow, bull, and ox with rope. I knotted the rope around the pole.
 
My father lit the dung fire in the fireplace.

In the morning, we took our cattle to graze again. My father relaxed while I looked after the cattle. 
 
That day, I took a bowl with me. "I am sending this lungfish's spirit to heaven today!" I said to myself.

Walking around, I hit the bowl I was carrying. It made a sound like the lungfish.
 
"Hub!" said the lungfish in the mud. I called to my father, "It is here!"
 
I threw my spear into the mud, but it broke. My father ran over quickly and speared the fish.

My father carefully removed the lungfish from its hole in the mud. We went home and roasted it on the fire.
 
My father enjoyed the meat, while my younger brother and I ate the tail. Our dog got the fish's colon.
 
It was a happy day for our family.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ostrich and Lioness were once good friends.

Unlike Lioness, Ostrich fed her chicks well.

Lioness’s cubs did not have enough food to eat.

Lioness wished the fat chicks were hers.

When Ostrich was not home, Lioness took the chicks.

When Ostrich returned, she asked, “Where are my children?”

Ostrich found her chicks with Lioness at her hut.

Lioness said, “The chicks are mine now. Take the cubs.”

Ostrich asked herself, “How can I get my children back?”

She called all the animals for a meeting.

The animals arrived for the meeting.

Elephant asked Ostrich and Lioness to speak.

Most of the animals were afraid to blame Lioness.

Squirrel said, “Children that look like birds belong to Ostrich.”

Then Squirrel ran into a hole.

Lioness was very angry. She went home with her cubs.

------------------------------------------------------------



Khotso rides a donkey. His donkey is blue. 

Khotso and his donkey eat together.

Grandmother Thabo is cooking. She is cooking in a black pot. 

Grandmother Thabo and her cat eat together.

Neo's cow is as green as grass. 

The cow stands on Neo's foot. She drops her bucket of milk.

Ntate Phakane has a black horse. His horse is very strong. 

The horse pulls the plough all by itself.

Thabang drives his car. He travels with his dog. 

Thabang's dog poops in the car!

The blue donkey, the green cow, the black horse, and grandmother's cat got into Thabang's car. 

They started to sing. Who has the sweetest voice?

------------------------------------------------------------



Khayanga lived with her parents happily until they died when she was ten years old.

Khayanga was taken in by Rosa, a distant relative.

Rosa was kind to Khayanga, but she was old, frail and poor.

Khayanga often visited her parents' graves to tell them of her misery.

One day when she visited, she received a gift.

It was a very special Gourd which appeared from her parents' graves.

The Gourd sang a beautiful and soothing song. Khayanga recognised the voice as that of her late mother.

It went like this:

Khayanga, ee, Khayanga! 
Our child the loved one! 
You're not alone, loved one! 
Have this gourd, loved one! 
Carry it everywhere you go, loved one! 
Let it console you loved one!

Khayanga carried her special Gourd everywhere.

With her Gourd, Khayanga felt her parents' presence and protection.

One day, something bad happened to her special Gourd.

It broke when she was fetching water in the river. Khayanga's heart broke as well.

Khayanga held the pieces of the broken Gourd in her small hands and sang:

Father and Mother, see the gourd is broken. 
The gourd you gave me. 
What do I do, Mother and Father? 
Be kind and show me a sign,
that you are still with me.

Khayanga heard her mother's voice saying to her: "Our child, pick up the pieces that are left. Use them to fetch water and wash your feet. When you finish washing, close your eyes." 

Khayanga obeyed and suddenly, the broken Gourd became whole once again.

Khayanga continued to carry her Gourd everywhere she went. Wherever she passed, people whispered to each other, "What type of gourd is this?"

With her special Gourd, Khayanga received everything she needed.

With the special Gourd, Khayanga knew that her parents were watching over her. 

Nothing bad could happen to her.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. 

Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."

But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. 

Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!

Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." 

Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."

Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. 

She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"

Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. 

Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."

"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. 

Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."

Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." 

Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."

So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" 

The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.

The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" 

Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."

The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." 

Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dusty car.

Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." 

"My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.

From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. And he tried his best not to get angry with her.

Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided it wasn't worth the price to get angry and break things.

------------------------------------------------------------



Today I am not going to school. 

It is a holiday!

Today I am not going to watch TV. 

There is no electricity anyway.

What am I going to do? 

Today I am going to listen to my body!

First,  I have to be very quiet. 

So that I can listen to my own body.

Yes,  now I can hear my breath. 

I breathe in and out,  in and out.

And I can make my breath noisier. Sssssssssssss! 

And softer. Mmmmmmm.

Now I can hear my heart beating! 

Doodom, doodoom, dooo dooom.

Can I make my heart go faster or louder? 

Yes, by jumping up and down twenty times.

Now see, my heart is beating faster.

If I put my fingers on my wrist, then I can feel my pulse!

I can hear myself laughing. 

Haha, haha, haaah, haaa!

I can hear myself crying. 

Boohoooo hooo!

I can hear myself clapping. 

Clap, clap, clap.

I can hear my stomach rumbling! 

Guddu, guddu, guddu.

My stomach is saying, "Feed me!"

My nose can smell cakes baking in mother's kitchen. 

And now I want to hear my jaws chewing those cakes!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a family who lived in a village. The parents in this family woke up early every morning to work in the fields. 

They left the baby with their elder son, Sipho who was ten years old, and their eldest daughter Bulelwa, who was twelve years old.

The older children loved playing outside during the day and they forgot about doing their household chores. 

They called their friends to come and play with them. The boys loved playing soccer. The girls loved playing with dolls around the yard. 

They forgot about looking after the baby when their friends arrived. The baby cried and cried and nobody heard.

One day, the children put the baby under a tree in the shade on a bright red blanket. They went to play. 

The baby began crying as usual.

A group of cranes flew above the playground and felt sorry for the crying baby. They tried to get the children to notice that the baby was crying but the children kept on playing.

The cranes decided to take the baby and raise it themselves.

Four cranes picked up the baby from under the tree. Each crane took a corner of the baby's blanket, lifted the baby up and flew away. 

The children did not notice anything because they were busy playing. The children's parents were working hard in the hot sun.

It was so hot that the mother decided to rest under a tree. While she was resting she heard her baby crying. She looked around but she couldn't see anything. 

Then she looked up and she saw four cranes flying away with her baby in the bright red blanket. She screamed and chased after the cranes. 

When the woman told her husband what she saw he did not believe her.

The cranes hid the baby between the reeds to protect it. They wanted to find a new family that would care for the baby. They fed it and put it to sleep. Then they flew away to look for more food. 

The baby slept for a long time without crying. When the baby woke up it started crying because it was hungry.

A big frog heard the baby's cry. It came closer and saw the baby wrapped in the blanket. The frog thought the cranes had stolen the baby, and decided to hide the baby from the cranes. 

Suddenly, the frog heard the voices of the cranes. There was no time to hide. The frog swallowed the baby and hid behind a big rock. When the cranes arrived they could not find the baby and they flew off to look for it. 

The frog hopped back to the baby's family home.

The baby's family was sitting in the evening feeling very sad. Suddenly, a big frog jumped through the door. The frog told them about how it swallowed their baby. 

They begged the frog to give them the baby. "Give me three flies to eat then I will give you the baby," said the frog.

The father caught three flies and fed them to the frog. The frog coughed and the baby popped out. The family and the frog jumped and danced with joy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Geeci was an orphan.

He begged the King to keep him. He also begged him to let him eat from the leftovers of the food the princes and princesses ate. 

The King agreed.

The king's last wife hated Geeci so much. She would not let him eat.

She drove him away anytime he came near the leftovers.

Geeci would go into the forest in search of wild fruits. One day, he fell asleep under the fig tree. 

He heard a voice saying, "Arise, where you are is a palace. You're the King!"

Suddenly, Geeci saw people, houses and domestic animals spreading out into a big kingdom.

He saw himself on a beautiful throne surrounded by beautiful queens and servants.

He had herds of cattle, goats and sheep. All the animals were led by a one-eyed ram called Pir-she. 

His favorite queen hated Pir-she so much because the blind eye always oozed with mucus.

Each time, the animals returned from grazing, safely led by Pir-she. All of them respectfully waited for Pir-she to drink first.

The queen would drive Pir-she from the pool to allow other animals to drink. Hoever, they would all turn away.

The queen continued denying Pir-she water. "Gbaaa! Pir-she will not drink!" She would scream.

The other animals too refused to drink.

Geeci simply looked away and said nothing. Pir-she cried out in a sad song but no one listened.

The animals complained to Geeci. They had not drank water for several days. They warned him that if he did not restrain his wife from evil, something strange would happen.

The King promised to do something about it.

Pir-she was the lucky charm behind Geeci's fortunes. But nobody knew except the animals.

He kept reporting the maltreatment but the King loved his favorite queen too much.

After seven days of thirst, Pir-she raised his mouth to the heavens and cried in a doleful tune.

"Geeci, Geeci! Jilaaa wa jinaaa! I have cried to you, but you love your queen more than the poor! Jilaaa wa jinaaa!"

As Pir-she cried, Geeci, the King, looked on. The whole kingdom, the wealth and everything folded away.

Geeci was left sleeping under the fig tree in his rags.

He realized that his unkindness to the poor and animals cost him his fortunes. 

He remained in the bush and never returned home again.

------------------------------------------------------------



Kariza loved to ask questions. She got this habit from her parents. 

They used to tell her, "If you don't ask questions when you are young, you will grow up to be an ignorant adult!"

One day, Kariza asked her teacher, "Why do our parents always tell us to wash our hands before eating, even when our hands look clean?" 

Her classmates liked her question. They didn't like being told to wash their hands!

The teacher answered, "Good question! Even when our hands look clean, they can still have germs on them."

She explained, "Germs cause illness. We can't see germs using only our eyes, we need something more powerful to see germs."

The teacher got a microscope from the cupboard. "A microscope is a tool we use to see things that are too tiny for the human eye to see," she said. 

The teacher gently scraped Kariza's hands with a stick and then wiped it on a microscope slide.

The teacher put the slide on the microscope and this is what they saw through the viewer.

Even though Kariza's hands did not look dirty, there were germs on them!

"There are germs all around us, on the things we touch in our classroom, playground or at home. 

These germs can make us very sick," warned their teacher.

She continued, "To kill these germs, we need to wash our hands with clean water and soap, especially before eating. 

Also, when we are sick we must wash our hands so that we don't spread the germs."

When she got home, Kariza found her father making an interesting tool. "What are you making?" she asked.

"This is called a 'kandagirukarabe' (step up and wash)," her father said. "You use it to wash your hands."

Kariza was surprised and said, "Oh yes! Our teacher told us about this tool. But most of us did not know about it. How does it work?"  

He laughed and told her, "Come closer and I will show you, my daughter."

"First, step on this piece of wood on the floor," said father.

"Then, the water container will tilt and pour water onto your hands. 

Remember to wash with soap," he told Kariza.

Kariza was happy and said, "How would I know this without asking questions? 

It's true that questions lead to knowledge."

------------------------------------------------------------



A long time ago,  there was a greedy Hyena.

There was also Tortoise.

Hyena and Tortoise were friends.

Hyena said to Tortoise, "Let us search for honey."

Hyena ran fast.

Tortoise followed slowly. He was afraid.

They crossed a river and got wet.

Then they saw beehives.

Hyena ran to the hives.

Hyena told Tortoise, "Climb up and get the beehive."

Tortoise climbed slowly.

Hyena was angry. He shouted at Tortoise.

Tortoise touched the beehive.

Bees swarmed in the air.

Tortoise fell. The beehive fell on him.

Hyena licked the honey.

The bees stung Hyena. He ran.

The bees followed him.

Hyena ran into the river.

The bees still followed him.

The beehive and the honey dried on Tortoise's back.

Tortoise got a shell to protect himself.

He went home.

The stings caused patches on Hyena's body.

Tortoise and Hyena are no longer friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a small village in Malawi, there was a special school.

It was called Chiko, a short name for love.

Our school was a place of hope and love.

It was a school for orphans like me.

Our school was surrounded by colourful flowers.

There were bright reds, sunny yellows, and peaceful blues. 

Our school was a happy place.

The staff gave us free food and school uniforms. 

It made us feel safe and loved.

Without this school, I would not have known how to read and write.

I wouldn't have learned to add numbers or discover exciting stories in books.

The teachers and staff at our school were like family. 

They made us feel important and cherished.

Every day at our school was a new adventure.

We learned the value of helping others and being grateful for what we had.

My school taught me not only how to read and write but also how to be a better person.

It showed me that with love, kindness, and education, we could overcome anything.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a man who had three sons. The youngest son was the cleverest and his father liked him the most. The man's two other sons were jealous of him.

So when the father died, he left all his cattle to his two elder sons. He only left one ox for the youngest son. But the brothers were still jealous.

One day they said, "We've got to slaughter your ox." He was the youngest so he couldn't protest. He said,  "If that must be so, there's nothing I can do. But please give me the hide."

When they slaughtered the ox, he took the hide. After drying it, he climbed a tree with it.

As it got darker, a group of merchants came to sleep under the tree. In the middle of the night, the young man started beating the hide with a stick.

When the stick hit the hide it sounded like thunder. The merchants thought that a storm was coming. They ran off leaving their goods behind.

The young man picked up the goods and took them home to his brothers. They asked, "Where did you get all these things?"

He said, "The price of hides is so expensive that I got all this for my one hide."

The brothers quickly slaughtered their cattle. They went to the market and called, "Hides for sale! Hides for sale!" The people at the market said, "We don't want your hides!"

They were very angry and said to their brother, "You fooled us, so as a punishment, we're going to burn your hut."

The smart brother said, "There's nothing I can do,  but please give me the ashes." They burnt his hut.

He took the ashes in a bag and went away to a rich man's hut. The rich man let him sleep in his hut.

As he went to eat, he said to the rich man, "Look after this bag, it has got a lot of valuables."

In the morning he started shouting. The rich man asked him what was wrong. "Someone has taken all my valuables and replaced them with ashes!" moaned the young man.

The rich man didn't want his reputation to be ruined. So he said, "I'll fill it up with anything you want." He filled it with wheat, teff and all sorts of seeds.

The brother went home and said, "Look, ashes have become very expensive. See what I managed to buy from selling those ashes."

The brothers burnt their huts as well. They shouted at the market, "Ashes for sale! Ashes for sale!"

Everybody said, "How stupid you are, who'll buy ashes?"

The brothers were very angry and decided to kill their younger brother. They tied him up and put him in a basket so that they could throw him over a cliff.

As they carried the basket to the cliff, they met an old man. He said, "My cattle have run away, will you bring them back for me?" They put down the basket and ran off.

The young man called from inside the basket to the old man. He asked, "What's wrong with you?"

The young man replied, "They want me to become a king but I don't want to be one."

The old man said, "If I get into the basket will I become king?" And the young man answered, "Yes."

The old man let the young man out of the basket and he got inside. After the brothers returned with the cattle, they picked up the basket and threw it over the cliff.

The young brother took the old man's cattle back to his hut. His brothers were amazed that he was still alive, but all they said was, "Where did you get these cattle?"

He said, "There are many cattle at the bottom of the cliffs. If you jump off the cliffs in baskets, you will find some too."

The older brothers got into baskets. The clever brother threw the baskets over the cliffs. He lived happily ever after.

------------------------------------------------------------



Akai had no shoes. Other children her age had shoes.

"It is difficult to play without shoes," said Akai to her mother.

"Akai,  I think it is time for you to have shoes," said mother.

Mother woke up Akai early the next morning.

Akai and her mother went to the market.

They went into a shoe shop. Mother bought shoes for Akai.

At night,  Akai thought about her new shoes.

Akai put on her new shoes.

Akai thought about how she would show off her shoes.

Akai wore her new shoes again. She danced around the room.

"Akai,  you must not wear shoes in bed," said mother.

Akai was so happy to have shoes for the first time.

------------------------------------------------------------



Jackie was a young and beautiful girl.

Her best friend was Nelly.

One Saturday, Jackie said to Mom and Dad, "Can I visit Nelly today?"

Mom said, "Please, Jackie, be careful on the way."

The last time Jackie and Nelly were together, they went sight-seeing.

Jackie got tired walking. 

Her cousin offered her a ride on his bike.

Jackie thought, "He is going too fast. I'm afraid we'll fall."

Jackie held on to the bike.

She shouted, "Stop! Slow down! I'll fall off."

They crushed!

Her cousin thought, "Jackie was right. I went too fast."

"My foot hurts. Mom told me to be careful on the way," Jackie thought.

Jackie thought, "I'll walk."

Then she saw a mango tree! Many ripe mangoes!

Jackie thought, "I'll just eat one mango then I'll visit Nelly."

Jackie heard, "Bzzzzzzzzz."

The bees were coming for her. She ran!

Jackie ran to escape the bee sting.

She forgot about the sweet mango.

Then she arrived at Nelly's home.

But Nelly was away visiting her aunt.

Jackie thought, "Why wasn't Nelly here?"

Disappointed, she ran back home.

Jackie thought, "I wasted my time. But next time, I'll plan it well."

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, mama bought different fruits.

"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. 

"We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.

My brother Rahim is greedy. 

He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.

"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. 

"Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.

Mama was angry with Rahim.

We were also angry with Rahim. 

But Rahim was not sorry.

"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.

"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.

Rahim started feeling unwell.

"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.

Mama knew why Rahim was sick. 

"The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.

Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. 

We believed him.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Mme Maneo planted a pumpkin seed.

It grew into a very big pumpkin. The pumpkin blocked her garden path.

Mme Maneo wanted to move the pumpkin. She went to her neighbour. "Mme Mapalesa, please help me to move my pumpkin. It is blocking my path," said Mme Maneo. 

The two ladies pushed and pushed, but that pumpkin did not move.

They went to Mme Masello. "Please help us move Mme Maneo's pumpkin!" they asked. Mme Masello came to help them. 

The three ladies pushed and pushed that pumpkin,  but still it did not move. "I don't know what to do," said Mme Maneo.

Just then a little worm came into Mme Maneo's garden. It was hungry. It nibbled the big pumpkin. 

"Stop!" said the pumpkin. But the little worm nibbled again.

"Stop! You are tickling me," said the pumpkin. "I don't like it." 

And the pumpkin rolled away down the hill.

The pumpkin stopped in a field at the bottom of the hill. Two shepherds found it. 

"What shall we do with this pumpkin?" they asked. "Let's eat it," they said, "it looks delicious."

The shepherds took a big stone and tried to break open the pumpkin.

"No!" cried the pumpkin. The shepherds jumped back. The pumpkin began to open.

Out of the pumpkin came a moloi. She had one arm,  one eye and one leg. She looked terrible. 

"Don't disturb me," said the moloi in a big voice. "I am the pumpkin chief." The pumpkin closed again.

The shepherds were very frightened. They ran home to tell their parents. 

"Oh! We are so lucky!" said their parents. "Don't you know about the pumpkin moloi?" "It is a very special pumpkin," said the shepherds' parents. "You must leave it alone."

"Next summer the pumpkin will open again and the moloi will scatter pumpkin seeds all over our villages. We will have many, many pumpkins to eat," said the shepherd's parents.

And so it happened that the next summer, Mme Maneo's pumpkin burst open.

It was full of many,  many seeds.

Out came the pumpkin moloi. With her one leg she climbed out of the pumpkin.

With her one eye she looked across all the villages.

With her one arm she threw all those seeds across the valley.

The seeds grew into beautiful big pumpkins in all the gardens in the valley. 

That winter everyone in the villages had lots of pumpkins to eat. They went to Mme Maneo. "Thank you, Mme Maneo!" they called.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is cat.

This is dog.

Cat and Dog look through the window.

They look through the window.

Then Cat and Dog see a butterfly!

The butterfly is pink.

Cat and Dog want to catch the butterfly.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly.

They follow the butterfly.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by foot. They walk after the butterfly.

But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is too fast and Cat and Dog are slow. They are too slow.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by bike. They ride after the butterfly.

But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is very fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are very slow.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by car. They drive after the butterfly.

But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is still too fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still too slow.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by boat. They float after the butterfly.

But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is super-fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still super-slow.

Cat and Dog follow the butterfly by plane. They fly after the butterfly.

But the butterfly is fast. The butterfly is still super-super-fast, and Cat and Dog are slow. They are still super-super-slow.

Then Cat and Dog stop. They stop and sit down. They sit down at a tree.

They sit down at a big tree.

But then...

They see one butterfly in the tree.

They see two butterflies in the tree.

They see three butterflies in the tree.

They see a hundred butterflies!

Bye bye Cat.

Bye bye Dog.

Bye bye butterflies.



------------------------------------------------------------



Ben keeps animals.

He keeps a cow.

He keeps a goat.

He keeps a horse.

He keeps a pig.

He keeps a hen.

He keeps a dog.

Ben is carrying milk.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Hyena and Donkey lived near a city.  

They met by chance and became friends.

They made an agreement to share food, and to defend themselves together.

They did everything together.

They even started living together.

One day, they went to a river to drink water. 

On their way, they were chatting and laughing.

At the river, Donkey went downwards and was drinking downstream. 

Hyena was drinking upstream.

Suddenly, Hyena stopped drinking.

He complained, "Donkey, why are you stirring up the water?"

Donkey kept silent and continued to drink.

Hyena was very angry. 

"Don't you listen? I'm talking to you, Donkey," shouted Hyena.

Donkey looked at Hyena and asked, "Since when did water move from downstream to upstream?"

Hyena replied, "Water started to flow upstream when we became friends." 

Hyena had decided to eat Donkey.

Helplessly, Donkey said, "It is my fault for thinking we could be friends. Alright, eat me then."

Hyena jumped up and grabbed Donkey.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, I will move out of this village.

I will live and work in the city.

First, I will go to secondary school and then, to university in Zomba City.

At the university, I will study economics.

I will apply for a job at the bank.

I will be a Bank Manager.

I will be meeting managers of many companies.

I will be giving them loans.

I will drive a nice car.

I will travel to many countries.

I can see myself in a black suit.

I will achieve all this by working hard every day.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, the rabbit was a great friend of the monkey.

One day the rabbit said, "Let's go for a walk and look for something to eat." 

The monkey agreed, but it was a trap for him!

They went to a field of maize and started to eat it.

But the clever rabbit had spoken to the owners of the farm, to catch the monkey and show him he was foolish.

The clever rabbit started shouting, "Robbers! Robbers! Your maize is all gone!" 

And he jumped up and ran away.

Suddenly, the owners appeared and found the monkey trying to run away. 

But he has a long tail and it was stopping him.

The owners followed him, shouting, "Stop! Stop! We saw you, you are the monkey."

But they caught him and started beating him.

He couldn't stand the pain so he said, "I was with my friend Rabbit. He is the one who invited me."

But the owners cut his tail off and told him, "Go and tell your friend that we cut off your tail!"

The rabbit took the monkey's tail to his house and cooked it to eat. 

He invited the monkey for lunch.

At the end of the meal the rabbit asked the monkey if he knew what he had eaten.

The foolish monkey answered, "No, I don't!"

The rabbit told him that he had eaten his own tail and then ran away. 

And from then on they became enemies!

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived a girl called Kalabushe. She talked a lot.

One day, Kalabushe’s aunt fell ill.

That evening, Kalabushe took food to her sick aunt.

Kalabushe met a hyena who had changed into a person.

Kalabushe told him, “I am carrying meat, eggs and milk.”

The hyena licked his lips as he thought about meat.

The hyena ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt’s house.

He swallowed Kalabushe’s aunt. He covered himself with her blanket.

Kalabushe arrived and called out, “Aunt, where are you?”

Kalabushe saw someone covered with a big blanket.

Kalabushe asked, “Aunt, why are your ears so big today?”

“Aunt, why are your eyes so big?”

“Aunt, why is your mouth big?” 

The hyena swallowed her!

Kalabushe kept asking questions while inside the hyena’s stomach.

He became tired of Kalabushe’s questions. He spat her out.

Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers.

------------------------------------------------------------



Zama is getting ready for school.

Dad is cooking porridge for breakfast.

"Mom makes the best porridge!" says Zama.

Porridge gives Zama energy for school.

The porridge is ready.

Dad pours the milk,  with love.

"Dad,  I think this porridge needs more sugar," says Zama.

"Mom's porridge tastes much better than Dad's porridge," thinks Zama.

"Dad,  please can I have more sugar?" asks Zama.

Dad gives Zama more sugar.

"Wu! Dad! You put salt on my porridge!"

"Dad,  when will Mom be home?" asks Zama.

------------------------------------------------------------



Jeninga loved his many cats.

He played with them and made them feel warm.

He fed them with meat and they were happy.

The cats loved staying around him.

Whatever he did, he minded them.

One day, Jeninga brought a dog into the house.

The dog's name was Bingo.

When Bingo came to the house, Jeninga paid more attention to him. 

The cats were very jealous.

The cats were angry.

They ran everywhere and knocked down the milk jug.

The cats all agreed to drive Bingo out of the house.

Bingo was a strong dog. He drove all the cats out.

He sat in the middle of the room, waiting for them.

All the cats ran out of the house. When Jeninga returned, he met some.

Some were nowhere to be found.

The grey cat was still missing. Jeninga searched for a whole day.

He finally found her on the tree at the back of the house.

The grey cat refused to come down.

Jeninga climbed up and carried her down.

Bingo was happy to see the cats all back.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is almost mid-year, the local community is getting ready for the annual Festival of Umbrellas.

It is a favourite time for both the young and old.

Aminata, Manu, and Awal are siblings who live with their parents in Suhyen, a farming community.

They had never experienced the Festival of Umbrellas despite hearing wonderful stories about the celebrations.

"What should we expect at the festival?" Aminata asked. 

"I want you to experience it yourself since you have already heard several stories," her mother replied.

Awal, being the eldest child, always went to the farm with his father, Mr Karim.

He had never experienced the festival. He had high expectations.

"Today is the day we have all been waiting for," said Awal.

Manu added, "I could barely sleep all night imagining how exciting the festival will be."

The three siblings quickly brushed their teeth. They completed their household chores, which included sweeping, cleaning and filling the water pots.

They bathed and got their dresses ready.

Mr. Karim and their mother, Maame Serwaa, got ready for the festival.

Other community members also prepared themselves for the festival.

Mr. Karim and his family walked to the bus stop to catch a bus to Akwadum, the central town for the celebration.

Several other people were at the bus stop as well with their umbrellas.

The main Akwadum park had been decorated with colorful ribbons and balloons.

There was excitement on the faces of everyone there.

"Mummy, there are chairs for the chief and elders, as well as the community members, but there are no sheds or trees," Awal said.

"There are also drums of various sizes," Aminata added.

At the festival, there were different sizes of Umbrellas. Children and their parents had their umbrellas over their heads.

There was loud music and dancing everywhere. Everyone, including the chief, sang beautifully and in rhythm with the drums.

There was an exchange of gifts. Each member of the community gave out a gift and received one in return.

Awal, Aminata, and Manu were happy as they participated. Mr. Karim and his family were full of joy. 

Later, they boarded the return bus to Suhyen and shared their experiences on their way home.

------------------------------------------------------------



Emeka lived in a fine house in Ebiba town. His parents were rich.  

Emeka had a dog called Chita. He looked after Chita very well.

Every day, Emeka's father took him to school in his car. He also brought Emeka home after school.

One afternoon on their way home, Emeka's father stopped to buy something at a big shop.

From the car, Emeka looked across the road and saw an old man. He was carrying a big load on his head. 

He was tired and walked slowly. Emeka kept looking at him.

The old man sat under the shade of a tree on the walkway and opened his bag. 

He had two flat plastic water bottles, which he was making into shoes.

Emeka thought about that old man for a long time. He felt sad. 

When he got home, he could not eat. 

He thought about what he could do.

He got up and took some money from his money bag. He called Chita and jumped on his bicycle. 

Emeka rode to the shop where his father had shopped.

The boy ran into the shop and came out with a bag. He went to where the old man was resting against a tree.

Emeka called out, "Good afternoon, sir." The man answered, "Peace to you, my child."

Emeka asked, "Sir, where do you come from? 

The old man replied, "My child, hunger has chased me from my village. I am here to earn money."

Emeka gave his shopping bag to the old man. 

Tears filled the man's eyes as he took the sandals from the bag. He thanked Emeka from his heart.

"I must go now before mother starts looking for me," said Emeka

The old man waved to the boy and his dog as they went. "Bless you, my child," he said with a smile.

"Where were you?" mother asked Emeka as soon as he got home. She was worried.

Emeka told her everything. She felt touched by his story.

Later, Emeka's father told him, "We are proud of what you did. But you must always tell us before you leave the house." 

Then he added, "Now, here is the money that you spent!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Keke sat on her swing. She loved her swing. 

It was the best swing at her school.

Keke moved slowly on her swing. Backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards.

When Keke moved, her swing went faster and faster. Soon she was right at the top.

Keke looked down at the ground. She was very high up. 

"Aeei!" she called. "Look how high I am!"

She was happy to be so high. She could see the whole village.

She was nearly as high as birds flying over the cornfields.

After a while Keke wanted to come down. The swing would not stop.

"Oh, oh, oh," she called. "I don't know how to stop this swing!"

The swing went on and on. Up and down, up and down. Keke was frightened.

"Where will this swing take me? I might go up to the moon. I must get off!" she cried.

So, Keke let go of the swing. She fell down, down, down.

"Oh, oh, oh!" cried the other children.

Keke fell onto the ground. She hurt her head. "Eeeeh,  eeeeh, eeeh," she cried.

The other children were very worried.

Keke did not know what to do. "Eeeeh, eeeeh, eeeh," she cried.

The children called their teacher.

"M'e Mpho, please come!" they called. "Keke fell off the swing. She has hurt her head."

M'e Mpho ran to the swing. She picked up Keke and kissed her head.

Keke smiled, "That's better. I will not go on that swing by myself again," she said. "I never want to go to the moon."

"Next time I will be with you on your swing, Keke," said M'e Mpho. "We can go to the moon together!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Neo takes her pig for a ride on her bicycle.

She hits a stone in the road. The pig falls down. 

It cries. It says, "Hooeeeee, hooeeeee!"

Tsotang finds it. 

He says, "Haaiee, who does this pig belong to?"

Tsotang chases it, until he catches it.

He takes the pig to the chief. 

The chief tells him to look after it.

Neo passes by on the path. 

She hears the pig grunting, "Hmmm, hmmm, hmmm!"

She goes in. She is happy to see her pig.

Neo says to her pig, "Come, let's go home. We will not ride the bicycle again."

------------------------------------------------------------



Kera kera, omulhumeabya awithe esyambene ibiri, inakabisasyo omwa nyumba yasyo eyo abyaakakingabuligholhogholho. Bulingyakya
  abya akakingulirasy neriyalisasyo. Abya akahangasyo omwamwanya owathemu ebithi ebikabugha.

Nahabyekyo sisyabyasikaghutha. Omwakiro kighuma, esyambene musyalhonda ngokusyangakingulha syangaghenda
  eyihya eriyasondya ebyerirya. Embene nguma muyabana enzira eyerikinguliramo olhuyi. musyaghenda
  eyihya samayalya emiriki eyomuyi oyo. Hanyuma werirya, musyasuba omwanyumba syamakinga olhuyi.

Omwangyakyangyakya omulhume, mukyaminyikalha
  indi emiriki yiwe yabiribya imuyikalibawa ne bisoro, mwathalengekanirya omwa syambene syabikalhani buwe. Omwakiro, esyambene musikakingulha syamalya emiriki.

Engyakya eyasubukako omulhume
  mwasangana emiriki iyabirilibwa, mwatabukana nerithabukana, mwatenga eribya akatsunga emiriki yiwe omwakiro. Omwakatikati ekekiro, mwahulhuka nerithumu, mwaghenda bolhobolho eyiri esyambene, mwaghusa erithumu.

Embene nguma muyatsimitwa
  neryo esyosi musyathibitha, omulhume mwingira omwanyumba. Engyakya, mwaghenda akayalebya ekyo abya atsimithire. Neryo mwasangana inabiritsimitha embene yiweyiwe. Mwaghalirwa busana nomwatsi oyo.

------------------------------------------------------------



I live with my grandmother. 

We live in a small hut.

People think we are poor. 

I think happiness is wealth.

We are happy.

My grandmother made me a beautiful jersey. 

Everyone in the village was talking about it.

My teachers asked my grandmother to make jerseys for them.

Soon, everyone in the village wanted a jersey.

Grandmother made a jersey for everyone. 

She sold the jerseys.

Now, we have more money. 

We are happier. 

No one thinks we are poor anymore.

I cannot take off the jersey my grandmother made for me. 

It makes me feel so proud of her.

------------------------------------------------------------



"Grace, don't forget your school bag!" Mama called. My bag was old, with patches and faded elephant images, but I loved it.

It held my books, pencils, and secrets. Today, something magical would happen.

At school, I found a tiny packet I'd never seen! Inside was a shiny red seed.

"Plant me," the seed seemed to whisper.

At break time, I buried it under the baobab tree in the compound.

Rumble! The ground shook as vines twisted into a ladder.

"Climb!" the wind whistled. My bag clung to my back as I ascended into the leaves.

At the top, an African green monkey in tiny glasses greeted me. "Welcome to the School of the Forest!" he said. 

A giraffe teacher wrote math problems on a chalkboard leaf!

The monkey gave me a woven basket. "Fill it with questions," he said.

I dropped in my loudest wonder: "Why do stars twinkle?" The basket hummed and glowed.

Suddenly, rain roared! "Prove your courage!" the giraffe said.

I opened my bag. My ruler became a bridge, my eraser a boat! We rescued a baby bird trapped in thorns.

When the storm ended, the basket gave me a golden pencil. "Write your own story," the monkey said.

I slid down the vine, back to my schoolyard.

At home, Mama smiled. "Why are your shoes muddy?" I hugged my bag. "It's a secret!"

That night, I wrote in my diary: School bags can take you anywhere.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is break time at Siyafunda Primary School. Nomsa,  Jabu and Zodwa have just sat down in the shade to enjoy their lunch. 

Today Nomsa and Zodwa brought food from home, but Jabu is eating a kota from Mr Mkhize's shop.

"Mmmm, this cheese is creamy! Mr Mkhize's kotas are the best!" exclaims Jabu licking his fingers. Tebogo is sitting nearby and overhears Jabu. He can't believe his ears. 

Tebogo asks, "Did you just say there's cheese on Mkhize's kota? Did you say Mkhize's kotas are the best? Are you joking?"

"Haa! You don't know Mr Mkhize! He's changed his ways and this kota speaks for itself," says Jabu pointing at his kota. The kota is stuffed with chips,  polony and atchar, and covered in creamy melting cheese. 

Tebogo is impressed. Just then Scelo arrives with his lunch and Tebogo says to his friend, "Hey Scelo, look at this kota!"

Jabu notices Scelo's face and asks, "Why are you so serious?" Scelo puts his kota on the bench next to Jabu's kota. 

"I got my kota from Mr Motaung. The kotas are equal in size, but mine has less filling!" 

"Yes," says Nomsa, "that's exactly why so many kids are buying from Mr Mkhize's shop now."

"So Mr Mkhize is a changed man? He used to slice one loaf of bread into five parts to make his kotas!" says Tebogo. 

"Ah!" replies Nomsa, "that was not a kota at all!" 

"Why was it not a kota?" asks Scelo.

"Ha Scelo!" laughs Nomsa. "Don't you remember what our teacher taught us about fractions? Cutting one loaf of bread into five equal pieces does not give us quarters. It gives us fifths." 

Scelo thinks, then he says, "I remember! Each part of a whole divided into 5 equal parts is ⅕ of the whole. Each part of a whole divided into 4 equal pieces is ¼ of the whole."

Zodwa interrupts, "But hey guys, what is going on with Mr Motaung's kota's? They're a quarter of a loaf, but they contain less than Mr Mkhize's kotas." 

Jabu frowns and says to the group, "If Motaung is having problems and goes out of business, then Mkhize will have no competition. What if Mkhize gets greedy and goes back to his bad old ways?"

A few days later, Mr Motaung is getting ready to sell lunch at break time. He's worried. Lately, fewer and fewer learners are buying from him. 

Mr Motaung asks himself, "Why are they all flocking to Mkhize? I thought we were selling the same kota at the same price."

Jabu on his way from Mr Mkhize's shop passes by Mr Motaung's shop. He calls the boy over, "Hey Jabu,  how are you?" Mr Motaung's eyes are not on Jabu but on the kota Jabu is carrying! 

He smiles when he realises that the kota has got more chips, more cheese, more polony and more atchar than his kotas!

The next time Nomsa and Zodwa are buying kotas,  Mkhize gives them a gift. 

"Wait a minute, I've got a surprise for you. Soon I'll be selling fruit at my shop. Here are some sweet juicy apples to try for free. Please share with your friends."

The girls are delighted. "Thank you Mr Mkhize!" they say at the same time. 

They decide to share the apples with Jabu, Tebogo and Scelo. They go to find them in the yard.

Zodwa tells the boys, "Mr Mkhize gave us these apples to share. He wants to sell them at his shop." Nomsa puts the apples on the bench so that they can all count them. 

"Well," says Tebogo, "we can each have an equal number of apples. But there's one apple left over."

"Let's cut that remaining apple into three equal parts," suggests Jabu. "What are three equal parts called?" mutters Nomsa to herself. 

"Thirds! Cut the apple into thirds!" says Scelo proudly.

"No, let's give that leftover apple to our maths teacher!" says Zodwa. 

The friends agree that it's a good suggestion to give the apple to Ms Nkosi after break.

The next week, Jabu and Nomsa are waiting for Zodwa at break. "Look, Motaung is back in business!" she says. Zodwa puts her kota on the bench and the three of them compare their kotas. 

"Wow!" says Jabu, "that kota is bigger than a quarter! And look at all those chips!" 

"I bet this cost a lot extra?" asks Nomsa suspiciously.

After break, as they head back to class, Zodwa takes her friends to read the notice board outside Mr Motaung's shop. Jabu and Nomsa can't believe their eyes when they read the sign: 

Get your supersize kota third! Only R3 more! A third of a loaf with extra chips and extra sauce. With polony OR cheese!

------------------------------------------------------------



I went mountain climbing.

The climb was very steep.

I was scared.

I saw a coloured butterfly.

It was beautiful.

My eyes followed the butterfly and I slipped. 

I fell down from the mountain and bumped my head.

I cried and cried.

I saw a monkey.

At first, I was scared but soon realized it wanted to comfort me.

The monkey walked away but came back with a watermelon.

I was still wondering if monkeys eat watermelons when he handed it to me.

The monkey kept me company as I walked home.

The monkey walked fast. I almost ran all the way home.

------------------------------------------------------------



Last week I received a lot of letters.

On Monday my doctor wrote a letter to my teacher.

Thabisile is sick. She must stay at home.

On Tuesday I got a letter from my class.

Get well soon Thabisile!

On Wednesday I got a letter from my best friend.

I drew this picture for you. Love from Dudu.

On Thursday I got a letter from my mother.

------------------------------------------------------------



A rainbow has seven colours.

The first colour is red.

Kewyu is wearing a red shirt.

The second colour is orange.

This is an orange. What else can you see that is the colour orange?

The third colour is yellow.

The yolk of an egg is yellow. What else can you see that is the colour yellow?

The fourth colour is green.

Our banana garden is green.

The fifth colour is blue.

The sky is blue.

The sixth colour is indigo.

These berries are the colour indigo.

The seventh colour is violet.

My dress is violet. Violet is my favourite colour! What is your favourite colour?

Do you know the seven colours of the rainbow?

------------------------------------------------------------



She is called Ms Phone. 

Find out why!

She has five cellphones. 

Each morning, she arranges her cellphones on the table.

The yellow one is for communicating with family.

The white one is for communicating with people at work.

She uses the red one to call those who owe her something.

She uses the pink one to call her best friends.

The purple one is for communicating with people who need her help.

Ms Phone likes people to be happy. 

She does not like fighting.

She lets the children watch television at her shop.

She visits the sick and the elderly in their homes.

When she passes by, people shout out, "Ms Phone! Ms Phone!"

Then she feels happy and says, "I am Ms Phone. Here, look at my phones!" 

That is Ms Phone and her five mobile phones.

------------------------------------------------------------



His hoe was too short.

His doorway was too low.

His bed was too short.

His bicycle was too short.

This man was too tall!

He made a very long hoe handle.

He made very high door frames.

He made a very long bed.

He bought a very high bicycle.

He sat on a very high chair. He ate with a very long fork.

He left his house and lived in a big forest. He lived for many years.

------------------------------------------------------------



My name is Zadoo. I love reading storybooks.

If I could visit an African Storybook storybook,

I would visit 'A Very Tall Man' in his very tall house in the forest.

I would sit on his very tall chair and eat with his very long fork.

I would visit 'The Magical Rainbow River' in Mbadede, to eat the ice cream found on the river banks. 

I may even take a drink for healing.

I would visit 'Kalabushe the Talkative', and ask her to please share the recipe for her grandmother's pie. 

I like learning new recipes.

I would visit 'Abebech the Bajaj Driver' in Ethiopia.

She is such an inspiration! 

Read her story to find out why she is inspiring.

I would follow the 'Busy, Busy Sun' to Terfa's compound for the recipe of  bier and apukpa. 

I hear it is some kind of millet porridge and bambara nut pudding.

I would join Juma and Kadogo in the 'Africa Unity Race', a marathon to unite all African people.

Maybe they would let me hold the torch of flames as we run together.

I would spend some time with Ayator and his friends, to learn more about how 'Emotions Come and Go'.

How are you feeling right now?

I would join Hamisi and his father to shop for a new uniform in 'Hamisi's Lucky Day'. 

I like admiring new and colourful clothes at the market, and finding out prices.

In 'Kariza's Questions', I would join Kariza at school to also ask her teacher some questions. 

I would use a microscope to see the germs on my hands. I would wash the germs away with soap and water!

I would visit Anansi the clever spider. I want to say "thank you" to him.

He did a splendid job at getting stories from the sky god Nyame, and bringing them to earth. Do you know 'How Stories Came to People'?

In this storybook, I took you to visit the characters and places in some of my favourite storybooks. 

When you next read a storybook, where will you visit and who will you meet?

------------------------------------------------------------



Yayeri ow'ekitalo asituuka munkyo bulildho. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Musangaalufu lwa bwire obwabise. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Ateekateeka obuliri bwe bukalamu. Era twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Alamusa bazaire be ni ba dhaadha be. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Ayondha mu maiso ge ni saabbuuni wa bbululu. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Asenhya amaino ge na lughaani. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Anaaba amaadhi amainogovu. Era twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Ayambala yindhifoomu ye eya kathungwa. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Avaala engaito endhirugavu. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Yeyuna ku isomero e Nakibbungulya. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Yaasoma, yasaayansa, ebyeidiini no okubala. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

Ayemba, yakinha, no okuzaanha omupiira. Twebuuza, "Lwaaki Yayeri wa kitalo?"

------------------------------------------------------------



Everybody in the village knew Mama Schola.

They also knew that she had a loud voice.

That day, there were cows at the market. 

"Push these cows away," Mama Schola said. "They are eating my vegetables."

"Hey you there! Push these cows away from here," she shouted. 

"They are eating my clothes."

"Where is the owner of these cows?" she cried.

"They are eating my grains."

Sorimpan, the herd boy, had just gone to drink water at a tap. His cows wandered off to the market. 

He hid away, squatting in fear, when he heard the shouting woman.

"Now look what these cows have done!" she continued to shout.

"They have broken my beautiful pots."

A short time later, "Aah! Not again!" she was heard saying.

"I will report this matter to the police. These silly cows have knocked down my fruit stand."

Sorimpan finally came out, stick in hand. He dodged between the gathering crowds and managed to get a clear view of his cows. 

Sorimpan's cows knew him well. They turned and looked up at him as he approached!

At this point, there was a crowd of onlookers of men, women and even children. 

They all stared at the cows which paid attention only to Sorimpan.

Suddenly, the cows broke their silence! 

They began to talk all at the same time, criticising the people!

The crowds were shocked and stepped back one by one, afraid of the cows. Then the cows stopped talking and watched the crowd in amazement! 

But Mama Schola was heard saying, "Since when did cows meddle in our market businesses?"

It was Mama Schola's turn to be criticised by the cows! 

All the other women selling moved to stand with Mama Schola out of fear.

The cows criticised the women, commenting on the state of their vegetables.

"What kind of vegetables are these? They are all old and drying up!"

It was clear that the cows were not yet done! 

They turned round and faced the cloth-stand and shouted, "You say we eat your clothes, what clothes? You mean these old rugs! Who will buy them?"

The cows then moved to the next stand and everybody followed them with their eyes. 

"Your grains are full of weevils. Who wants to eat that! We only tasted to see if this is a place to come more often!" the cows sneered.

The cows turned their heads towards Mama Schola's pots. "And you Mama Schola, stop making noise. Your pots break so easily, so don't blame us." 

With that, the cows turned and left, followed closely by Sorimpan.

------------------------------------------------------------



Do you remember the Great Race between the hare and the tortoise?

For a long time, no one in the entire animal kingdom could talk about anything but the Great Race and its two contestants.

We all know that the rabbit was defeated because he was lazy and overconfident. 

We know that the tortoise won the race because he was slow and steady.

The forest animals knew this too, and continued to respect both creatures equally. Even the two competitors remained friends. 

The tortoise did not assume airs because he had won. The hare, realising he had been defeated fair and square, bore the tortoise no grudge.

Many months passed. The king of the jungle where the hare and the tortoise lived had some important matters to discuss with the king of the neighbouring jungle. 

But the first king could not leave his jungle just then. He decided, instead, to send the hare and tortoise to the neighbouring king, as his representatives.

"At least one of you must go to the neighbouring kingdom," ordered the king, when the hare and the tortoise had presented themselves.

"I want you to discuss certain important matters with the king there, and come back to me with his thoughts on those matters." 

"Now go!" he said, as he dismissed them. "And mind,  you only have a day to complete the task."

The road to the neighbouring kingdom was not smooth or easy. It was rocky and full of thorns. 

There were also two rivers to cross on the way.

After some thought, both the hare and the tortoise realised that neither of them could complete the task alone.

They had to travel together.

The plan was for the hare to carry the tortoise over the thorny parts of the route, and for the tortoise to carry the hare across the two rivers.

The next day, they collected the various messages from their king and were ready to go. 

The hare made short work of the thorny parts of the route with his giant loping strides, while the tortoise held on for dear life.

When they came to a river, they switched places, and the hare clambered onto the tortoise's back.

The tortoise swam across the river gracefully. 

Once both rivers had been crossed, it did not take them long to arrive at the neighbouring kingdom.

After long discussions with the neighbouring king on all the matters raised by their own king, the hare and the tortoise were ready to leave.

The journey home was even smoother than the outward journey, since both the hare and the tortoise now knew exactly what to do. 

The two old rivals had worked so well that they reached the king well ahead of the deadline he had set!

------------------------------------------------------------



You have never met such a clever dog as Heidi. 

She thinks that she is a human.

When I brush my teeth, she also wants me to brush her teeth.

When I am watching television, she moves her eyes. 

It is as if she understands everything on the screen.

One night, we were watching a soccer match.
 
There was a knock on the door. 

It was my friend, Mmapula.

It was good to see her. We greeted each other in excitement.

But, Mmapula didn't greet Heidi. 

I forgot to introduce them!

Heidi was used to being greeted by someone shaking her paw.

She was very annoyed.

We went to sit. But before I could offer Mmapula a chair, she sat down on Heidi's chair!

The dog could not take this nonsense. But she did not give me a chance to speak. 

In a blink of an eye, Heidi had jumped on Mmapula's lap. 

She barked at Mmapula, staring her in the eyes.

Heidi was fierce! Mmapula was in a dilemma.

I acted quickly, and removed Heidi from her lap.

But from that day, Mmapula never again set foot in my house.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is nearly break time at Siyafunda Primary School.

The two spaza shop owners at the school are preparing lunch to sell to hungry children.

In Mr Motaung's shop, the bread is cut and ready for making kotas. He carefully cuts out the soft middle of each quarter loaf. Then he puts polony and chips in the space inside.

Motaung puts two spoonfuls of his wife's homemade atchar in each kota. He likes to boast that his kotas have atchar inside and atchar on top!

In Mr Mkhize's shop, the chips are nearly ready, but he is still cutting his bread for kotas. He is worried. Things are not going well with his shop.

"It started well," thinks Mkhize. "But now I get fewer and fewer customers. At least I'm reducing some of my costs by cutting five kotas from a loaf."

Jabu and Zodwa are buying lunch. Zodwa buys from Mr Mkhize. Jabu buys from Mr Motaung.

He believes that Motaung's kota has got more chips and atchar than Mkhize's kota.

The queue at Mr Motaung's shop is always longer. 

Zodwa waits for Jabu. Then the friends sit together in the shade to enjoy their kotas.

Zodwa notices something that makes her stare and frown. "What are you staring at?" asks Jabu. 

"Your kota! It looks bigger than mine," says Zodwa.

They both look very closely at their kotas. Sure enough, Jabu's is bigger. "Something is not right here," says Zodwa. "I wonder if this is the reason Mr Mkhize's shop is not busy anymore." 

Jabu thinks for a while and then he says, "Well, I heard that some kids saw Mkhize cutting his bread into five pieces for kotas!"

Nomsa overhears Jabu and Zodwa talking. She curiously asks them what's wrong with cutting it into five pieces for kotas. Zodwa and Jabu reply together, "A kota is a quarter of a loaf!"

Nomsa still looks confused, so Zodwa explains, "The loaf must be cut into four equal pieces. Otherwise, they are not quarters."

Nomsa is cross because she also buys from Mr Mkhize. "So, he is stealing bread from us!" she says in a loud voice.

Zodwa decides to go back to Mkhize's shop to complain. She marches off, holding her kota up in the air.

Nomsa hurries behind her. Jabu sighs and gets up to follow his friends.

Mr Mkhize is disappointed when he sees that the children aren't new customers. "Oh, hello again kids," he mutters, "how can I help you?" 

"Mr Mkhize, I asked you for a quarter and I paid you for a quarter. But this is not a quarter," says Zodwa,  pointing at her kota. "I want a quarter kota or my money back," she adds firmly.

"Is it true Mr Mkhize? You've been cheating us!" cries Nomsa.

A few children have followed them to the shop and are now listening to the fierce accusations.

Mkhize waves his hands wildly. "What are you saying about me?" he protests. "I'm not like that! I want you to get out of my shop now!"

Then Zodwa says quietly, "We will tell everyone what you are doing. It will spread like wildfire throughout the school. You will have to close your shop. No one will come and buy from you!"

Mr Mkhize looks at the three children standing in front of him. Then he looks at the growing crowd outside his shop.

"OK," he says eventually, "I will give you your money back. "And also promise that you will cut each loaf into quarters for your kotas," speaks up Jabu.

Mr Mkhize promises that he will. Then he clears his throat and says loud enough for everyone to hear, "I also promise that I will add more atchar and more chips to my kotas."

Mr Mkhize did indeed add extra chips and atchar to his kotas.

Soon more children were buying from him, and his shop started doing well. He was even able to hire someone to help him.

Now there is a healthy competition between Mr Mkhize and Mr Motaung, and everyone is happy.



------------------------------------------------------------



My imagination is like a key that opens every door!

In my imagination, my umbrella has two handles so I can hold it with my sister.

In my imagination, there are superhero bees.

Super bees, who fly around in water just as easily...

...as they can fly in the air!

In my imagination, flowers grow in boots and sing.

In my imagination, every child has ice cream for supper...

...and then falls asleep as flowers sing to a purple moon.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was severe drought across the land. Bushes and trees dried up. Rivers stopped flowing. 

There was no water and no food. People, cattle and wild animals grew thin.

Many of the monkeys who lived in the hills died of hunger. 

One day, a female monkey decided to look for a place where there was no drought.

Monkey travelled for many days. 

She passed bushes, climbed hills, and crossed valleys.

Finally, Monkey arrived at a place called Tirkol.

At Tirkol, Monkey found different kinds of fruit and a flowing river. 

She was very happy.

Monkey stayed there. She ate plenty of fruit. She grew fat and shiny. 

She swam in the river every day.

After some time, Monkey decided to return to the hills. She wanted to see who had survived the drought. 

She took fruit and followed the path she had used before.

When she reached the hills, the surviving monkeys came to welcome her.

Everyone wanted the fruit she brought. 

They asked her, "Where is this wonderful place? We want to go there too."

Monkey told them about the goodness of Tirkol and agreed to take them there.

All the monkeys moved to Tirkol. They ate fruit, drank water, rested and grew fat. 

They swore never to return to the hills.

The monkeys who lived in Tirkol soon discovered that monkeys from the hills had moved to their territory.

The Tirkol monkeys worried that the fruit would disappear. 

So they decided to chase away the monkeys from the hills.

One day, the monkeys from the hills were at the river drinking water. 

The Tirkol monkeys attacked them with canes. They wanted to chase them away.

But just before they started fighting, an elderly monkey hung down from a branch. 

He asked the monkeys, "Why do you want to fight? There is enough food for all of us."

All the monkeys realised that this was true. 

And so, since that day, monkeys from the hills and monkeys from Tirkol have lived together without fighting.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Hare and Hyena were good friends.

Hare said to Hyena, “Let us do farming together.”

Hare suggested that they should plant maize and share duties.

Hare told Hyena, “My work of chasing birds is difficult.”

Hyena agreed to till the land alone.

When Hyena pulled out weeds, Hare sat down singing.

When the maize was ready, Hare enjoyed chasing birds away.

Hare said, “I harvest above the soil. You harvest below.”

Hare harvested all the maize and stored it.

Hyena found only roots under the soil.

Hyena realised that he was cheated. 

He was angry.

They planted potatoes. 

Hyena said, “I will harvest above the soil.”

They worked on the farm together, singing.

At harvest time, Hyena harvested only potato leaves.

Hare harvested a lot of big potatoes and stored them.

Hyena chased Hare to get revenge. 

Their friendship ended.

------------------------------------------------------------



Monkey lived in a big tree on the bank of a river. 

In the middle of the river there was a small island. Lots of fruit trees grew on that island.

Monkey wanted to go and eat the fruit. He saw a big rock half way across the river.

He thought he could jump onto the rock, and then onto the island.

He jumped into the air and landed on the rock. He jumped again and reached the island. 

He enjoyed eating the fruit and then went back home. He did this several times.

Crocodile lived in the river with his wife!

The wife said, "Dear husband, you should go and lie on the rock. The colour of your skin matches the colour of the rock."

A few days later, Crocodile saw Monkey going onto the island.

He quietly climbed over the rock and carefully lay down and kept his face under the water.

Monkey finished eating and was ready to go back. But the rock looked higher than usual.

He spoke to the rock, "Dear rock, you seem to have grown. Are you alright?"

Crocodile was a fool and thought the rock must be a talking rock.

So he answered Monkey and said, "I look bigger because a big crocodile is lying on me."

Monkey said, "Dear Crocodile, I know you want to eat me. I am very old and you can have my body. But I must say goodbye to my children in that big tree."

So Crocodile gave Monkey a ride on his back!

As soon as they were there, Monkey climbed the tree and said, "Thank you for the ride, my dear friend. Goodbye, now you can go home!"

Crocodile replied, "But you promised."

Monkey laughed and said, "What a fool you were to believe me!"

He disappeared into  the branches of the tree. Crocodile never did catch clever Monkey!

------------------------------------------------------------



There once lived a noble wiseman. His name was Mayian. 

He had a favourite black and white ox. His ox-name was Mayiankertuut. 

He had a big family and many cattle too.

At that time, a family of ogres came to Nuerland looking for food. 

The ogre's wife was breastfeeding their twin babies. 

The ogres were starving because they had nothing to eat.

Mayian had untied his cattle for grazing. 

When the ogres saw the cattle, they chased them, and caught Mayian's black and white ox. 

Its ox-bell was heard ringing from far away. The ogres killed the ox and began eating it.

Young people from the village came sprinting to get the cattle.

They saw the ogres eating the ox. They threw spears at the ogres and tried to kill them. 

Mayiankertuut arrived. He was holding a shield and weapons.

Mayiankertuut knelt and saw the mother ogre breastfeeding her twins. 

He stopped the youths from killing them.

He said, "Leave them, let them eat my ox. It's the hunger of a breastfeeding mother! The better life is ahead of us."

The youths heard the advice of Mayiankertuut. He told them, "Collect the ox-bell and tassels. Take them to the cattle camp. Leave the meat for the ogres to eat." 

The ogres were joyful because of what Mayian had done.

After some years, Mayian and five men travelled to a far away land, in search of giraffes.

As they arrived, it started raining heavily. They ran to a cattle byre and slept there.

That cattle byre belonged to an ogre! 

The ogre left that night to inform the other ogres.

He told them, "In my byre, there are six men whom God brought to us. Come and cultivate my field. Afterward, we will eat them."

The ogres arrived very early in the morning. 

They filled big bowls with boiling water, preparing to eat the men.

Among the ogres who came, was the one who ate Mayian's ox. Mayian saved him and his family long ago.

The ogre who Mayian had saved entered the cattle byre of the owner of the field. 

He recognised Mayiankertuut and exclaimed, "Are you Mayiankertuut?"

"Yes, I am!" replied Mayian.

"So, you are the one we were told to eat after cultivating the field," the ogre smiled.

The ogre asked the other ogres, "Is there anyone who doesn't know my twins?"  

"No, there is none," said the owner of the field.

The ogre narrated his story, "Long ago, my wife and I ate the favourite ox of this man. When the youths of his village came to kill us, he protected us. 

Without the help of this man, my twins, my wife, and I, would be dead."

The ogres freed Mayian and the other five men.

The ogre who Mayian had saved invited them to his home.

The men were served food on new plates and given spoons which had never been used before.

The men and the ogres spent the night chatting.

The ogre asked them, "What brought you to Ogreland?" 

They replied, "We came looking for giraffe tails. We use them to make necklaces and bracelets.

Early in the morning, the ogre and his children went hunting for giraffes. They brought many giraffe tails to Mayiankertuut and his friends. 

When Mayian was ready to leave, the ogre and his children accompanied them to Nuerland.

When they arrived home, they told everyone about the hospitality of the ogres. These were the same ogres that Mayiankertuut protected long ago, which saved Mayian and his friends today.

Always remember, a better life is ahead of us. That is to say, 'What goes around, comes around.'

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a great builder in Kabubbu village.

He built many houses in the village.

But he was sleeping in a bad hut.

People asked about this hut every day.

"Don't worry, I have a plan," the builder always replied.

He saved his money and bought bricks.

Then he bought sand, cement, iron sheets, and nails.

Gradually, he built himself a large, beautiful house.

His friends rejoiced to see this new house.

He prepared for a party and invited everyone.

They ate and drank.

Then they danced.

The builder received many gifts for his new home.

Now the builder in Kabubbu village sleeps in a good house.

------------------------------------------------------------



The sun rises in the morning, by the east side.

I hear the cock crow at dawn.

The sun moves over Terfa's compound before the morning meal.

I smell the aroma of bier and akpupa following the sun to my window.

The sun goes behind a tree at school during lunchtime. 

Then it arrives in a puddle in the middle of the playground.

The sun stands above my head. My shadow stands beside me. 

I play the shadow game with my friends.

My shadow grows bigger, then smaller. We run after it.

My shadow grows longer, then shorter. We run after it.

I stand, my friends stand. We see our shadows sway. 

We grow tired and return to class. After school, we go home.

The sun yawns. 

I see the sun sink slowly in the west. I see my shadow on a wall. 

It is time to go to bed.

The sun goes down behind the clouds.

I lay down in my bed, and dream of the sun traveling afar.

------------------------------------------------------------



In Crystal Classic Academy, there was a young boy named Nyimutaban. 

He loved drawing, but his parents discouraged him.

He used all his notebooks for drawing.

His parents and teachers punished him.

But Nyimutaban did not stop drawing.

His parents got him a lesson teacher, Mr Ngavo. 

He was a very kind man. He allowed Nyimutaban to draw after lessons.

Mr Ngavo got him drawing books, boards, and colourful paints. 

Nyimutaban became an excellent artist. He also did well at his school subjects.

Every year, Nyimutaban received many prizes at the school's prize-giving day. 

Other students admired him and wanted to be like him.

When he grew up, Nyimutaban was among the best artists in Nigeria! 

He worked very hard and won many awards and contracts.

Nyimutaban thought to himself, "What can I do for other children who love art but are forced to study science subjects?"

He established the Nyimutaban Arts Centre! At the Centre, children can learn art after school and develop their talents. 

Nyimutaban also organized art competitions to encourage artists.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Hyena and Hare were great friends. They were both poor but Hare owned a donkey.

He also had a very small basin, which he used to feed the donkey.

One hot afternoon, Hare decided to give water to his donkey. However, Hare could not fetch water from the well with his small basin.

So he decided to borrow a bigger basin from Hyena. Hyena gave Hare his basin because of their friendship.

After getting water and giving it to the donkey, Hare went home with Hyena's basin. 

Two weeks later, Hyena wanted to wash clothes but Hare still had his basin. Hyena left the clothes and went to Hare's house for his basin.

Hare gave Hyena his large basin. He also gave Hyena a small basin. 

Hare said, "Your basin gave birth to a young one and since we are friends, I am giving you the two of them." Hyena was happy and accepted the two basins.

A few days later, Hare wanted to water his donkey and again he went to Hyena for help. Hyena thought,  "Since I will get an extra basin, I will give him my basin straight away!"  

Hare took Hyena's big basin and went to water his donkey. Afterwards he took Hyena's basin home with him.

Hyena waited to collect his basin from Hare. He wanted to give it time to give birth to a young one! 

When Hyena went to Hare's home to collect his basin, Hare said, "Hyena, my friend, I was just about to come to deliver the bad news. Your basin died two days ago. You know that all things that live, also die!"

Hyena could not believe this news. He said, "I must call bigger animals to judge the case." 

So Hyena called the bigger animals for a meeting. Elephants, buffalos, hippos and giraffes arrived at Hare's home to judge the case.

Hare explained what happened. He said, "The first time I borrowed Hyena's basin, it gave birth to a young one and I gave him the two. Unfortunately,  the second time I borrowed his basin, it died before giving birth. Whatever has life also dies." 

All the animals agreed with Hare. Hyena lost his basin to Hare.

------------------------------------------------------------



I use my feet to run, jump, and kick.

I use my hands to eat, work, and hug.

But the head is more important than feet or hands.

The head has the eyes. 

I see with my eyes.

The head has the nose. 

I smell with my nose.

The head has the ears. 

I hear with my ears.

The head has the tongue. 

I taste salty and sweet.

The head has the mouth. 

I speak with my mouth.

The head controls the whole body!

------------------------------------------------------------



My pet is a cat. She is called Koko. She is friendly and beautiful.

My brother Tom and I like playing with Koko. My mother likes watching us while we play with Koko.

Koko is so playful. Koko likes playing with her little sisters while her mother is asleep. I like watching Koko playing with her sisters.

We all like watching Koko playing with butterflies. Koko keeps us busy during our free time.

Everyone in our family loves Koko.  My brother bought a present for her. This made me very happy.

Koko is always clean and smart.  I feel good when I see Koko.  She likes me too.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Palesa. 

Her name means 'flower' in her language, Setswana.

In the morning Palesa talks to the orange tree. 

"Orange tree, please give us lots of oranges."

Palesa walks to school. 

On the way she says to the grass, "Please grass,  grow greener and don't dry up."

Palesa passes wild flowers.

"Flowers, thank you for your bright colours."

At school, Palesa talks to the little tree.

"Tree, please grow big branches so we can read under your shade."

Palesa talks to the hedge round her school.

"Please grow strong and stop bad people from going inside."

When Palesa returns home, she visits the orange tree. 

"Are your oranges ripe yet?" asks Palesa.

"The oranges are still green," sighs Palesa. 

"I will see you tomorrow orange tree," she says. 
"Perhaps then you will have a ripe orange for me!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago in a town called Sunland lived a girl with very long legs. 

Aku was her name. Aku wondered about a lot of things.

Sometimes Aku's father, Ataa Ankra, a fisherman let her go to the river with him to fish in his canoe.

While Aku fished with her father, she wondered why the sun always looked at her from the sky. 

Sometimes Aku helped her mother, A'anua to cook. Aku wondered why palm oil looked red in calabash but yellow in yam pottage.

And Aku wondered why Oti, her brother, and the other boys would not let her play football with them.

Once, Aku asked the boys why. They only laughed and told her to go and play with the girls. 

The girls too would not play with Aku. "Your legs are too long," they always said. Aku was left lonely. She had no one to share her many thoughts with.

But Aku soon became friends with the sun. She looked forward to seeing the sun every morning when she woke up. 

The cocks crowed to announce sunrise. Aku loved to dance in the early morning sun, her shadow dancing with her. The tweeting of birds made the cock crow music sweeter. 

The sun filled Aku with happiness and made her smile a lot. But one day, the sun did not rise.

Aku waited for the cocks to crow. They did not. The birds too did not tweet. And without the sun in Sunland, people could not go about their daily activities. Farmers could not go to tend their crops. 

The sky was grey and sad. Ataa Ankra could not go fishing. Children too could not prepare for school. And women could not go to the market to haggle over the prices of soap and kerosene. 

Aku missed all these. She missed the cock crows and bird tweets too. And she missed the sunrise more.

Everyone wanted to know where the sun went. "Maybe the sun is dead," some people said. "The sun has travelled," said others. 

Aku disagreed, "No, the sun is not dead. And the sun has not travelled. Or it would have first told me." 

Some people chuckled at what Aku said. She continued anyway, "I tell the truth. The sun is my friend. The sun is not dead. It is only .." But no one would hear anymore. Everyone forgot about the sun. They laughed hard at Aku. The children laughed too. 

The children's laughter pained Aku the most.

Sad like the sky, Aku hastened into her house. 

On the way, she accidentally kicked her brother's football. The ball rolled into the kitchen. There was a calabash of palm oil in a corner of the kitchen. The ball hit the calabash. The calabash toppled. 

The palm oil in it spilled. The palm oil soiled the ball.

Oti came into the house with one of his friends to fetch his ball. He saw the toppled calabash, the spilled palm oil and his soiled ball. 

Before he could run out to tell A'nua what Aku had done, Aku picked up the ball and ran off. The boys followed Aku. They all met A'anua outside the house. A'anua saw Aku holding the ball. Before she could call Aku and scold her, Aku ran past her. 

Oti, A'anua and all the people watched Aku run away. They wondered what she would do with a soiled ball.

Aku stopped when she got to the middle of the town square. She put the ball on the ground. 

With a mighty swing of her hands and a swift pull of one long leg behind the other, Aku kicked the ball. The ball turned round on the ground, spinning towards the edge of the town square. It hit the roots of the palm tree at one end of the town square.

Then the ball shot into the sad sky. With mouths opened wide, the people of Sunland gazed after the flying ball. The ball flew beyond the clouds, beyond the gaze of the eyes. 

Everything was still. All was quiet. Suddenly, the sky cleared. The clouds became white, round and fluffy. Then a big ball came from behind the clouds. The ball was bright. And it was red and yellow like palm oil. The ball was the sun. Aku's sun. 

Everything stirred. The quietness left.

Soon, everyone was rushing home to prepare for their daily activities. 

Ataa Ankra looked for his fish bucket. Farmers took their hoes. Children bathed and dressed, ready to go to school.

Women tied monies at the ends of their cover cloths. They carried their basins and baskets and hurried to the market.

The sun returned to Sunland. Aku made it.

A new day began...

------------------------------------------------------------



I love my teacher.

She is a good teacher. She is kind and patient.

She has braided her hair so nicely.

She has put colourful beads in her hair.

Her beads are green,  white,  red,  and yellow.

Mom,  please would you braid my hair like my teacher's?

When I am older I will put beads in my hair.

I will grow up to be just like my teacher!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, mama bought different fruits.

"When can we have some fruit?" we asked. 

"We will eat the fruit tonight," said mama.

My brother Rahim is greedy. 

He tasted all the fruit. He ate a lot of it.

"Look at what Rahim did!" shouted my little brother. 

"Rahim is naughty and selfish," I said.

Mama was angry with Rahim.

We were also angry with Rahim. 

But Rahim was not sorry.

"Are you going to punish Rahim?" asked little brother.

"Rahim, you will be sorry soon," warned mama.

Rahim started feeling unwell.

"My stomach is painful," whispered Rahim.

Mama knew why Rahim was sick. 

"The fruit is punishing Rahim," she thought.

Later, Rahim said sorry to us. "I will never be so greedy again," he promised. 

We believed him.

------------------------------------------------------------



My name is Simo.

I have four friends.

Their names are Zizo, Lele, Sisa and Ayanda.

My friend Zizo likes to play soccer.

My friend Lele likes to swim.

My friend Sisa likes to play hide-and-seek.

My friend Ayanda likes to read.

Me? I like to do the things they like to do.

I play soccer with Zizo.

I swim with Lele.

I play hide-and-seek with Sisa.

Come, friend, what do you like?

Come, play soccer with us.

Come, swim with us.

Come, play hide-and-seek with us.

Come, read with us!

------------------------------------------------------------



I wonder if there is another me somewhere in the world.

Who looks the same.

And talks the same.

And even has my curls.

Someone with my eyes, my ears.

Who even has my laugh.

Who can do what I can do.

And can't do what I can't.

I've looked and looked everywhere to find another me. 

I went down to the park and looked behind the trees.

I looked around, up and down.

At every single face.

I couldn't find another me in any single place.

There's only one me in the world! 

I'm special, oh it's true!

But not just me, don't you see? 

There's only one of you!

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, animals had no legs.

Maguru had given legs only to people.

Maguru decided to give legs to every animal.

The animals wanted legs to walk and run.

It was hard for them to crawl.

When the day came, different animals crawled to Maguru's house.

Maguru gave legs to animals and birds.

Some animals danced, while others fell down.

They said, "We will never crawl again."

Millipede was the last animal on the line.

Maguru gave Millipede all the remaining legs.

Millipede said happily, “I will move faster than others.”

After Millipede, Snake came begging, “Please give me some legs.”

Snake said to Maguru, "I over-slept."

Maguru did not find any legs for Snake.

From that day, Snake still waits to get legs.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a rich cunning man called Madola. 

He hired people who worked hard but he did not pay them their wages.

Dande was 11 years old. He went to Madola for work so he could buy medicine for his grandmother.

Madola hired Dande to graze his animals.

At the end of the month, Dande went for his pay.

The cunning Madola said, "Go home and come back tomorrow for your pay."

Dande arrived early at Madola's home expecting to be paid.

Madola said, "Why! Are you a student? Why so early? Is this a school?"

Madola took Dande away from other workers.

He said, "I will pay you only if you bring me a gourd of honey."

Dande thought, "I need the money for grandmother's medicine."

He ran to the forest and placed two gourds beneath a bee-hive to fill them up.

While Dande wondered how to punish Madola, a small black poisonous snake entered one of the gourds unnoticed.

Afterwards, Dande sealed the gourds and left.

Dande gave Madola one gourd expecting his pay.

After tasting, Madola said, "Bring me another gourd and I will pay you." 

Dande ran for it.

Dande brought the second gourd.

He gave it to Madola saying, "Here is another gourd of sweet honey like the last one. Pay me now."

Madola took the gourd but said in a cunning way, "There is no pay today. Wait for the end of the year." 

Dande was angry.

Madola wanted to eat the honey. He put his finger in the gourd and was bitten.

He cried, "I'm bitten! Help!"

The snake disappeared unnoticed.

All the workers ran away not knowing what had happened to their employer.

A short while later, an ambulance arrived to take Madola to hospital.

------------------------------------------------------------



My dinosaur and I look at my birds in the sky.

My birds and I meet Chimpanzee in the tree.

My chimpanzee and I play with my giraffes on the hill.

My giraffes and I make monkey balls from clay.

My monkey and I eat bananas with Gorilla every day.

My gorilla and monkey fear Tortoise in every way.

Tortoise and I go home very slowly with Snake.

Snake and I love to hiss and sing songs by the lake.

My entire family and I live together in great happiness!

------------------------------------------------------------



Goat was king of animals and birds.

He called a meeting.

Goat told them that he had a dream.

They all listened.

The dream was about hunger.

"What shall we do?" asked Cat.

Hen and Duck said, "Let's keep food in the king's store."

King Goat said, "Tie up anyone who does not obey."

The time came to choose a new king.

They chose Cat.

Goat did not want Cat as king.

"I am the king," Goat said angrily.

Goat did not take food.

Cow asked, "What shall we do?"

The animals and birds talked together.

They were angry with Goat.

Dog said, "I was always with him when he was king."

Sheep said, "I gave his children my beautiful wool when he was king."

Pig cried, "When he was king, I looked after his garden."

"Did Goat think he will be king forever?" Sheep asked.

The animals agreed that Goat must take food to king Cat.

The animals found Goat relaxing.

Goat said, "I will always be king."

"We will tie you and take you to the new king."

Cow pulled Goat to the king's court.

Others cheered.

That's why goats refuse to move when they are pulled.

------------------------------------------------------------



Lizzy lived next to a busy road. She would often sit outside and watch the activities of the street. 

Full taxis carried people to work. Children passed on their way to school, and runners jogged past in the evenings.

Lizzy also liked to watch the insects as they crawled and flew around the yard. 

Sometimes Lizzy nibbled on the sour flowers that grew under the tap at the back of her house.

One day, Lizzy saw two girls on the other side of the road. They wanted to cross and were holding hands for safety. 

Mamma always told Lizzy, "Before you cross any road, look left, look right, look left again. Check it's safe to go."

Finally, there was a gap between the cars. The one girl sprinted across, leaving the other who was hesitating. 

"Come on Mosa, quickly before the next car!" shouted the girl who had crossed. Mosa jumped forward without checking.

Lizzy watched with big eyes as the blaring of a car hooter reached her ears.
 
"DOOFF!" the car catapulted Mosa into the air.  She landed on the sidewalk near Lizzy's house.

Lizzy's eyes got even bigger and her jaw dropped.  She darted into the house.  

"Mamma! Mamma! A girl has been bumped by a car!  She is lying outside of our yard and she is not moving!" cried Lizzy.

Mamma rushed outside. She saw Mosa, and quickly called an ambulance. 

People began to  gather around Mosa, who lay unconscious. 

Soon, the sound of an ambulance siren filled the air.
"Whee whoo, whee whoo!"

The worried paramedics placed Mosa carefully on a stretcher, and took her to hospital. 

After Mosa's accident, the local schools introduced road safety lessons for parents and children.

The community petitioned for a pedestrian crossing, so that no more children would be hurt.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, in Joburg's Orange Grove, a little girl called Phyllis was born into the world. 

Two people in love, hugged their sweet little babe. 

No-one knew then, what a dancer they'd made.

By the time she was four, she had learned very quick. She impressed all her teachers, with her ducky feet flicks! 

Before school and after, she danced everyday. Nothing pleased Phyllis, more than ballet.

When the world was ready for Phyllis at fifteen, She arrived in big, old London, ready to live her dream. 

She said goodbye to all her friends. She was ready to start fresh. Watch out Royal Ballet School! Phyllis is here to impress.

When Phyllis danced Swan Lake, it was fit to show the Queen! After years of pirouetting, she was ready to be seen. 

Dancing for the audience, she turned and twirled about. Look! Everyone is smiling! See how they clap and shout!

From Mexico to Canada. From the USA to France. Phyllis travelled far and wide, so the world could see her dance. 

With the Royal Ballet Company, and her ballerina friends, she spread her love for ballet. She never wanted it to end.

Phyllis always knew, that dance was in her heart. But she longed to return home again, and make a fresh new start. 

So she leaped and bounded, back to her beautiful land. Her ballerina roots were regrown. She was once more South African.

Dancing wasn't just for fun, as Phyllis always knew. She'd work at dancing day and night, and with hard work she grew. 

Always smiling, always trying, through good times and through tough, Phyllis always did her best. She couldn't get enough.

Romeo and Juliet, Swan Lake and Giselle. Phyllis danced these for the people: graceful, tireless, well.   

With partners Gary Burne and Eduard Greyling too,  her magnificence inspired the audience. To her, flowers they threw.

Reward comes easily, when you put yourself to the test. Phyllis came to realise this, once she was called 'The Best.' 

She was awarded 'Prima Ballerina Assoluta.' The greatest dancer of them all! Phyllis would be forever known. She wanted nothing more.

Goodness! What a catch! Phyllis met her loving partner. His name was Phillip Boyd. He was another dancer. 

Together they were married. And together they would dance. No-one could be better matched, given half the chance!

Though they had no children, Phyllis and Phillip were never sad. The two of them found another way to help other Mums and Dads. 

They started Dance For All, a special school for dance. So that children with no money, could also learn to prance!

She left a legacy of dance, and incredible success. Her magic was passed on to others to help them become their best. 

Her students spread across the world, inspired by her ducky feet. They dance on while we watch, dreaming from our seats.

------------------------------------------------------------



In a lively African village, Ndabè the monkey and Ndakòrò the meerkat were best friends. 

They played, ate, and promised each other, "We'll always share everything!"

One day, they discovered a mango tree. "Let's split the fruit fairly!" said Ndabè. 

But Ndakòrò whispered, "I deserve more!" He hid extra mangoes in his burrow.

"Why are my mangoes so few?" Ndabè asked.

Ndakòrò lied, "Birds stole them!" Ndabè frowned but trusted her friend.

Later, Tuma raided a beehive. "Share the honey!" Ndabè called.

"The bees did not leave any honey!" Ndakòrò claimed, licking sticky paws.

Ndabè grew suspicious. She set a trap. "A gift from the bees!"

Ndakòrò crept in at night—THUD!—he fell into the pit!

"Why did you lie?" Ndabè asked.

Ndakòrò cried, "I wanted more for myself!"

Ndabè sighed, "Dishonesty breaks trust."

Ndakòrò returned everything he stole. "Forgive me," he begged.

The villagers murmured, "Will he change?"

Ndakòrò worked hard to rebuild trust. Ndabè smiled, "True friendship needs honesty."

They vowed never to hide or lie again.

------------------------------------------------------------

















I can read.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a hardworking farmer. 

He had a hardworking wife, and two sons.

He had enough food because he and his wife worked very hard. 

He wanted his children to have a good life. He never let them do any work.

After some time, his wife died.

The man still did not want his children to work.

He did the field labour and all the housework too.

But as time went on, the man became old and sick.

He started to worry about what would become of his children when he died. They would not be able to take care of themselves.

He called his sons. He said, "My inheritance to you is a lot of gold hidden in the fields. So, it's up to you to plough them and find the gold."

He also called his neighbours and said, "I'm going to die soon. My sons do not know how to look after themselves. Please look after them until they can do it for themselves."

After the man died, the neighbours provided his sons with food for some time.

The brothers did not want to be robbed of the gold their father buried.

They decided to do the digging themselves.

They dug one field after another, but they did not find any gold.

One asked the other, "Do you think our father cheated us?"

The other brother said, "No, I think our father was saying that farming is gold. And if we dig the fields, plant, and plough, we can become rich."

So, like all the other farmers, they dug up the fields.

They grew wheat and became very rich.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a huge baboon with a large group of baboons that followed him. 

This baboon was a tyrant!

But there were several huge baboons in the troop. 

The followers of the tyrant sometimes got confused about who to obey.

One day, the other baboons said to the tyrant, "We need to be sure that you are the one giving us orders."

"All right," said the tyrant. "I'll wear a piece of cloth around my head. You must make sure that you follow my instructions exactly." 

They all agreed.

A big baboon tied a head band round the tyrant's head. 

He said, "From today, whatever I tell you to do you must do. I don't want any disobedience."

When the tyrant jumped the others jumped, when he sat down the others sat down. 

When he screamed, the others would scream.

As time went by the head band became tighter and tighter.

One day the tyrant sat down and said, "This head band is hurting me." 

And he put his head in his hands.

All the baboons sat down, and they put their heads in their hands.

They said, "This head band is hurting me."

The tyrant yelled, "No,  I'm serious!" And the followers said, "No, I'm serious." 

The tyrant cried, "This thing's killing me!" And they all said, "This thing's killing me."

The tyrant clutched his head and fell down. They all imitated him and fell down. 

Then he began struggling, and they began struggling. He fell over over the cliff!

Although the rest of the baboon troop survived, the tyrant died from his injuries.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a man called Zoba.

Zoba was a father.

Zoba's son was Azibo.

One day Zoba and Azibo went for a walk.

They saw a suitcase.

"Pick it up and we will take it home," said Zoba.

Azibo picked up the suitcase and put it on his head.

On the way home, a snake came out of the suitcase!

Azibo dropped the suitcase.

Father and son ran away!

------------------------------------------------------------



If I were a bank manager,  I would be giving money to everybody.

If I were a vehicle,  I would transport people free of charge.

If I were a hunter,  I would hunt for animals which have no hair.

If I were a rat,  I would grow fat and chase the cat.

If I were a baby,  I would cry for only expensive things.

If I were a cat,  I would be eating rats to grow fatter.

If I were a hen,  I would be laying golden eggs for people.

If I were a beggar,  I would not accept coins.

If I were a doctor,  I would treat people with slaps!

If I were a priest,  I would be taking all people to heaven.

If I were a mosquito,  I would be sleeping under a mosquito net.

------------------------------------------------------------



Don was a big baboon. He was a bully.

He was the baboon chief.

His followers gave him a special cloth.

"I will wear this on my head," said Don.

"Everyone follow my orders. Do not question me!" shouted Don.

So,  the followers followed their chief. If Don jumped,  everyone jumped.

But the band on Don's head was too tight.

He touched his sore head. The baboons touched their heads.

"This hurts," said Don. "This hurts," they copied.

"This is too tight!" "This is too tight," they copied.

Don fell down,  over a cliff. They all copied him.

The baboon chief died. His followers were hurt,  but they lived.

------------------------------------------------------------



This story is about me, and an Old Age Home.

It is a big building in Bertrams, Johannesburg.

The walls are colourful, and it is clean and quiet inside. The people that live there are very old. 

My mother took us there one day.

This Old Age Home is my happy place! 

I become happy whenever I see old people and can help them.

One day I went there and I washed some of the old people's hair.

I also served them food.

Some of the old people were scary, but it still made me happy to be there.

There was this old angry lady who didn't want anybody to help her. She would start shouting.

There was another old lady, I held her hands and she didn't want to let go. Her hands were soft and warm. 

She had the same name as my sister, Aisha.

Old people make me happy. They have stories of past times which I will never know.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ikpyande angahar

Angahar

Anu

Iwenge

Iyav

Vanger

Akev aveegh

Akase aveegh

Anu aveegh

Ityough

------------------------------------------------------------



Chat was born blind. 

Her eyes had never seen her parents, or her brothers and sisters. She knew their faces by touch.

One day, Chat was strolling in the garden. 

She liked the sweet scent of flowers. 

She loved to touch their soft petals.

Chat wished she could see flowers, just once. 

"They are lovely," she said to herself.

Every day, Chat walked in the garden. She knew her way around. 

Today, she raised her head to the skies.

Suddenly, she heard thunder and lightning. 

"I need to hurry back to the house," Chat thought.

Rain began to fall. 

Chat slipped, lost her balance and fell. 

She hit her head on a stone.

When Chat woke up, there were people around her. 

"What happened?" she asked.

"You fell and bumped your head," her father said. 

"Thank God you are fine," said her mother.

"Daddy, mummy?" asked Chat. She also called the names of her brothers and sisters. "Please, get me a flower."
 
Everyone was surprised.

Her sister returned with a flower. 

Chat held it gently. "It is so lovely," she said.

Her family looked at one another. 

"Chat, can you see the flower?" her mother asked.

Chat played with the flower in her hand. 

"You are all so beautiful, just like this flower," she smiled.

------------------------------------------------------------



Letter 's' builds words.

Letter 's' makes more.

You can add an 's' to a word to have more.

 Adding 's'  makes more things.

Adding 's' to a word forms a plural. 

Removing 's' from a word forms a singular.

Even though letter 's' builds words there are some words that change the rules.

If a word ends in ch, sh, s, ss, x or z then use 'es.'

If a word ends in 'y,' swap the 'y' with an 'i' before adding 'es.'

But if there is a vowel before the 'y' add 's.'

 Letter 's' changes things.

Adding 's' means more than one. 

For everything add 's' unless the rules change.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mzako lived in a little town with his mum an dad. He was four years old.

Mzako found it difficult to play with other children. His parents were worried about this.

Mzako's parents decided it was time for him to go to school. 

They took him to the school gate and said, "Have a great time at school, Mzako!"

Mzako was so anxious that when he entered the school, he got lost!

He wandered into a classroom, and it turned out to be the grade two class.

The very next day, Mzako went to school again, excited to make friends. However, to his surprise, the school was closed because it was a holiday!

Mzako felt a little silly, but he didn't give up.

The following day, Mzako made another mistake.
He brought his lunchbox to school but forgot to bring his schoolbag with all his books. 

The other children looked at him, and Mzako felt bad.

Days passed, and Mzako still had trouble making friends.

He felt lonely and sad.

One day, he was sitting on a bench all alone. A friendly girl came up to him. 

She smiled and said, "Hi, I'm Amina. Do you want to be my friend?"

Mzako's eyes lit up, and he replied, "Yes, I'd love to be your friend!" 

From that day forward, everything changed.

With Amina by his side, Mzako never got lost at school again. She introduced him to other kids.

They played games together. Mzako's life was better than before.

Mzako learned that having friends was the best thing in the world.

With friends by his side, he could conquer any challenge that came his way. His life was filled with joy and laughter.

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandmother brought fruit from the market.

They looked delicious.

My brother Vusi was very greedy.

Who bit the fruits?

Grandmother became angry and shouted.

We suspected Vusi.

We told grandmother.

Grandmother asked him and he confessed.

Suddenly,  Vusi didn't feel well.

He ran to the toilet.

Vusi held his stomach.

Grandmother asked, "What lesson did you learn from Vusi's experience?"

------------------------------------------------------------



Musa's father and mother were very rich.

Musa was stubborn. Whenever they sent him on an errand, he refused to obey.

His father was always angry with him because he was stubborn and made friends with bad boys.

His mother advised him, "Don't make friends with bad boys," but Musa wouldn't listen.

Musa did not like to go to school because his bad friends advised him not to.

One day, Musa saw his friends smoking and asked for a cigarette.

After he smoked, he told the boys, "I want to join you guys."

The friends asked, "Really?" Musa replied, "Yes." So they took him to their master.

The master of the gang asked, "Musa, do you want to join us?" "Yes," Musa replied.

Musa joined the gang and started doing bad things. 

He started stealing and threatening people.

After stealing, he went home. His father asked, "Musa, where are you coming from?"

But Musa insulted his father and pushed him out of his way.

Everyone said Musa was a bad boy.

Wherever they saw him, they ran away from him.

A year later, Musa was arrested by the police.

While he was in prison, Musa learned to change his bad behaviour.

Everyone was happy because Musa was away.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there lived three girls in a desert village in the Kalahari. Katitu Momambo was the youngest of the three. She was small but clever and wise. 

The big girls went into the veld one day to gather food and wood. Katitu ran after them, but the sisters said, "Go back Katitu! You are too small to go with us! Stay at home!" Katitu followed them from a distance.

When they noticed her, they were too far away from home to send her back, so she joined them. While she was walking behind them, Katitu cut herself some wood. She made herself a bow and many arrows. 

The girls walked and walked and walked until the sun dropped into the Kalahari horizon. They were lost. They walked into a deserted village and found a hut in which to spend the night.

An old woman was sitting next to the hut. Little Katitu went and greeted her. 

"Oh?" answered the old woman, "This is the village of the Big Snake! He stays in a big hole in the cattle kraal. When people come to milk the cows, he eats them! He will go to your hut at night when you sleep and kill you there!"

Wise little Katitu did not panic. She asked the old woman for a hard cow skin to cover the door of their sleeping hut. 

Then Katitu wanted to sleep a little, so that she could stay awake throughout the night. "When the wind begins to blow," she said to her sisters, "you must wake me up." 

The wind came up, the sisters awoke Katitu and went to sleep. Katitu fixed the hard cow skin against the door of the hut and made a little hole in the middle for her bow and arrows. Katitu heard the Big Snake approach.

"Hai, gom-gom, hai, gom-gom, where are they?" sang the Big Snake. 

The little clever girl answered him with a chant, "Here they are, here they are!" 

Then the Big Snake rushed against the hard skin at the door of the hut. Little Katitu shot an arrow through the hole in the skin. 

Yes, the little girl killed the Big Snake.

Then Katitu woke up the older girls. 

"Sister, sister, sister," she whispered, "get up, get up, get up!"

And when the girls woke up they saw a big snake lying there. "Come, we have to take him back to his hole!" shouted Katitu. 

They rolled him up, rolled him up, rolled him up and they set him right back in his hole. 

"Hurry! We have to run!" And the girls ran and ran and ran.

The next morning, the Big Snake's wife told his children to go and look for him. When his children found him lying dead in his hole, they screamed, "Father is dead! Quick, let us go after those girls!" 

All the snake's children went after the girls. Katitu told her sisters to turn into trees. When the snakes arrived at the spot where they had seen the girls, only trees were standing there. 

The snakes were tired and lay under the trees to sleep. When they were asleep, the girls turned back into human beings and ran on.

The girls continued to run and were very tired and thirsty. Eventually, they saw a waterhole! None of the older sisters wanted to scoop the water from the deep well. They asked Katitu to climb in as she was the smallest. 

"Will you help me out of the well if I climb into it?" asked Katitu. "Yes," they replied, "we will help you." 

Katitu went into the well and scooped water for her sisters.

Each girl drank and then walked away. They all left Katitu in the deep well and walked home. Later that evening, the elephants came to drink. One of them drank and left. Another one drank and left. 

The last elephant drank and swallowed Katitu with the water! A few drops of Katitu's blood sprayed onto the reeds growing at the water hole.

Meanwhile, Katitu's sisters had arrived home without any food or wood. They were crying and told the family that Katitu was lost.

Everyone started searching for her. Katitu's little brother and his friend were searching too. They became very tired and rested next to a waterhole. They cut some reeds to make themselves flutes. When Katitu's brother played on his flute, the flute sang by itself: "Is this my brother who plays me, who plays me. The other girls left me, left me and the elephant swallowed me,  swallowed me!" 

The boy rushed home and handed the reed to his father, who played it. And again, the reed sang: "Is this my father who plays me, plays me? The other girls left me, left me, and the elephant swallowed me, swallowed me!" The father handed the reed to Katitu's mother, who played it. And again, the reed sang: "Is this my mother who plays me, plays me? The other girls left me, left me, and the elephant swallowed me, swallowed me!"

Katitu's father called the young men of the homestead and ordered them to find the tracks of the elephants and find Katitu. 

The young men hurried off. They met the first group of elephants and asked them, "Elephants, elephants, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?" 

And the elephants sang: "!a plaf!a plaf! We trot lightly. We are so light, we carry nothing!" And they passed on.

The young men met up with an old elephant in the bush and asked, "Old elephant, elephant, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?"

The old elephant sang: "!a plaf!a plaf! I trot lightly! I am so light, I carry nothing!" 

But now the young men heard a little voice in the belly of the elephant. "Cut him open! Go on, cut him on his left side, for I am sitting on his left side!" said the voice.

They held the old elephant down and cut open his belly. There was little Katitu lying inside! The young men took her out and carried her home. Katitu was welcomed as a hero by the villagers. 

And that is the tale of Katitu Momambo. The wise little girl who saved her sisters from the Big Snake, saved them from the snake's children, and (with the help of her brother) saved herself from the belly of the elephant. 

Of course, her sisters were punished.

Story notes Ju|'hoan storyteller,  Nxisae Magdaline Nxao,  told a short version of this story in Dkar,  Botswana,  in 2005 (Winberg 2009). In 1993,  Sigrid Schmidt recorded another version from Paulina Oxoros in northern Namibia (Schmidt 2007: 59). This particular version was retold by Marlene Winberg in 2013 for the Cave to Cave European Union storytelling project in Spain,  based on Nxao and Schmidt's recording. The 'clever little girl' belongs to a well-known story type where a vulnerable young girl (or young boy),  saves the lives of others,  by engaging her wit and the power of words,  rather than supernatural means to solve problems. The illustrations in this story are from story boards by Marlene Winberg,  interpreted digitally by Satsiri Winberg through manipulations of the Manyeka Art Collection of paintings made by San artists.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mama K has been harvesting cabbages all week. Doobie,  Maya and Duksie help Mama K in her vegetable garden on Saturday mornings. Today the children are going to help with counting and packing the cabbages. Then Baba K will take boxes of cabbages to sell at the market.

The taxi drops off the children at the garden gate. They can see the huge heap of cabbages piled up near Baba K's old truck. "Yo! What a lot of cabbages!" says Maya pointing. "There must be a thousand cabbages there!" laughs Duksie. "No way! Two hundred at the most!" disagrees Doobie.

Mama K is waiting at the gate. "Hello everyone,  I'm happy to see you!" she greets the children. "Now let's get to work. You'll need to count the cabbages and put them into boxes,  12 cabbages in each box. I have 20 boxes. Two of you can each pack 7 boxes and one of you can pack 6 boxes."

The children stand around the pile of cabbages. They talk about different ways to count the cabbages. "I think I will count mine in 2s," Maya says. "I like counting in 4s," says Duksie,  "it's quicker."  "I'm going to count in 3s,  just to be different!" pipes up Doobie.

Soon the children have filled 20 boxes. "Good work!" exclaims Mama K. "Look,  there are some cabbages left over. My pigs love cabbages so let's share these with them," she suggests. "How many cabbages did you pack into boxes? How many cabbages were left over?" she asks the children.

The next job is to write the price on each box and then help Baba K load the boxes on his truck. They must put half the boxes on one side of the truck and half on the other side,  to balance the load.

"We're almost done!" says Baba K. "Let's see,  how many more boxes we must still put on each side to balance the load?"

Soon all 20 boxes are loaded onto the truck. Baba K warms up the engine and drives off to market. "If I can sell all the boxes," he thinks to himself,  "I'll have enough money to fix the pig pen and get a surprise for the children!"

Back at the farm,  Mama K and the children water plants and rake leaves. By twelve o'clock they are all tired. Mama K tells them,  "It's time for your treat. Can you guess what it I have for you today?"

She goes inside to fetch their surprise. The children wait patiently for her to return while they guess what she might bring them. When she comes down the path her apron pockets are bulging!

"Let's see if you guessed right! What's in store for you today?" Mama K tips out her apron pockets and a pile of yellow apples falls onto the table. "See,  I was right!" Duksie squeals. Mama K tells the children,  "Now remember the rule. Share fair! No one to get more or less than the other!"

First the children count the apples in 2s. The count: 2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  12,  14,  16,  and 1 apple left over, Altogether there are 17 apples.

Next,  they share out the apples equally. There are 2 apples left over. The children then put their apples in their bags to take home. How many does each child get?

"Let's cut the 2 apples to share between us," suggests Duksie. "How many parts of the apple will we each get?" asks Maya. "I know the answer!" smiles Doobie.

Just then Baba K arrives home from market. The truck is empty and Baba K is smiling. "I sold all the cabbages. Now I can fix the pig pen and buy you that soccer ball you wanted.  "Yay!" shout the children."



------------------------------------------------------------



Nalaba ki magulu kkumi ekinene nga ki kkirira ku luguudo.

E motoka n'ejja nga eyambuka ku luguudo.

Omuvuzi wa magulu kkumi yali ayogerera ku ssimu.

Yali tatunudde ku luguudo.

Wajjawo akabenje akaamaanyi.

Ambyulensi ne poliisi baaja okuyamba.

Bbuleeke dawuni bbiri zajja nezijjawo e motoka zoombi.

N'ekanga.

------------------------------------------------------------



Joshie loved to play with toy excavators. His dad, mom and grandparents gifted him excavators. 

He loved to play with his friends.

One day, he noticed his favorite excavator could not move well. "Why is my excavator not moving?" He wondered.

He picked it up and looked at the wheels.

"The wheel is stuck!" Joshie exclaimed. He asked his daddy for help.

"Let's fix it together," Daddy replied.

Joshie held the car while Daddy showed him how to use a small tool.

"Wow, let me try to fix it too!" Joshie said as he fixed the wheel.

When the car moved again, Joshie jumped with joy. "I fixed it! I am so smart!" he exclaimed. 

"Maybe I can make my excavator one day," he said.

"You can do anything you set your mind to, Joshie," his mummy said.

Joshie smiled and ran around the house shouting, "I can do anything!"

From that day on, Joshie wanted to fix and build things.

------------------------------------------------------------



His hoe was too short.

His doorway was too low.

His bed was too short.

His bicycle was too short.

This man was too tall!

He made a very long hoe handle.

He made very high door frames.

He made a very long bed.

He bought a very high bicycle.

He sat on a very high chair.

He ate with a very long fork.

He left his house and lived in a big forest.

He lived for many years.

------------------------------------------------------------



Nobuhle was a beautiful 10-year-old girl who lived in a village called Malangeni.

She loved walking to school with her six-year-old brother, Bubele.

Bubele loved his sister and always looked at her pretty face. 

He told her she was the most beautiful girl in the village.

One day, Nobuhle forgot her English workbook at home. When she could not find it in her school bag, she got worried. 

The other girls made fun of her. She did not want to believe what they were saying about her.

Nobuhle was hurt. During break time, she walked alone.

She sat under a big shady tree in the school yard and cried hard.

As she cried, she looked up and saw many beautiful and colorful butterflies. 

They were flying and dancing around the tree.

Nobuhle thought about what she saw. One butterfly sat on her shoulder.

The butterfly whispered, "Hello. I know why you are crying. Some girls who do not know beauty called you ugly. That is not true. You are a beautiful girl."

Upon hearing that,  Nobuhle immediately wiped away her tears. 

The magical butterfly looked at her face, smiled, and told her never to doubt her beauty. 

Then, it flew away.

Nobuhle looked at the magical butterfly as it flew away to join the others.

A beautiful smile spread all over her face.

At that moment, Nobuhle stood up and watched the butterflies as they danced. 

Excited, she joined the butterflies and danced with them.

From that day on, Nobuhle regained her confidence and knew that she was beautiful.

She no longer worried about what others said or thought about her. 

Nobuhle would often visit the tree to remind herself that she was beautiful.

------------------------------------------------------------



There existed a monstrous animal called Lingiri. 

It lived in a cave at the foot of a mountain.

Lingiri swallowed all the people on earth. 

Except one pregnant woman.

This expectant mother lived alone near a forest. 

She would go to collect firewood to cook her food.

One time when she went to collect firewood, she collected a heap that was too heavy for her to carry. 

She said to herself aloud, "Who will help me raise this firewood on to my head?"

It so happened that the day for this mother to deliver was due. When she was struggling to lift the firewood, the child jumped out and said, "Mother, let me lift for you." 

Since the child still had the umbilical cord, she named him Otukolia. His name meant 'one with a long uncut umbilical cord'.

When Otukolia had grown up a bit, he asked his mother, "Eyaa, I see only you and me, where are the other people?" 

His mother replied, "Grow up a bit more."

Each time Otukolia pestered his mother to tell him where their relatives were. 

But his mother would always reply, "Grow up a bit more."

When his mother saw that the boy had grown up and was able to defend himself, she told him about the monstrous animal. 

"This monster has swallowed everyone. It lives in a cave at the foot of the mountain. The people are still alive in the monster!" said the woman.

When he was about seventeen, Otukolia started making many sharp razor blades. 

When he was fully prepared, he climbed up the mountain. He sat on a stone and started calling Lingiri in a loud voice, "Li--ngi-ri-ri-ri, Li-ng-i-ri-i-i-i."

When Lingiri heard the call, he responded, "Yiyiyiyiyi -yi-yi-yi-yi," and his voice shook the earth. He said, "I've eaten all the Bari. I've eaten all the Ndrua. I've eaten all the Ma'di. Who is calling me up there?" 

Otukolia called again and Lingiri responded asking the same question, "Who is calling me up there?"

Lingiri walked out of his cave. 

His long tongue stretched out towards Otukolia, ready to eat him.

Lingiri attempted to lick up Otukolia with his tongue. 

But each time, Otukolia cut Lingiri's tongue with the sharp razor blades.

Lingiri's tongue got smaller and weaker until the monster died. 

Otukolia took a machete and cut open the monster's tummy.

All the people in Lingiri's tummy came out with great joy. They thanked him for liberating them. 

Otukolia became their king for defeating Lingiri.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ndhovu ndala eli kuja kunhwa maadhi.

Ntwiga ibiri dhili kuja kunhwa maadhi.

Mbogo isatu ne ebinhonhi bina byona bili kuja kunhwa maadhi.

Mpuuli itaanu ne ngiri mukaaga bili kutambula okuja ku maadhi.

Ntulege musanvu dhili kulumukira ya maadhi.

Bikere munaana ne ebeike mwenda bili kughugira mu maadhi.

Mpologoma ndala eghologoma. Yeena ayenda kunhwa maadhi. Ani atya Wampologoma?

Wandhovu mulala ali kunhwa maadhi ni Wampologoma.

------------------------------------------------------------



What do you see in this picture? 

There is a small motor boat sailing on the sea. 

Those people on board are going to dive. They will be diving under the surface of the sea. They will visit the world under water.

They are preparing to dive. They need to carry tanks with oxygen in order to breathe while they are diving.
 
Oxygen tanks and other special equipment will help them to breathe while they swim under water. 

Are you ready to dive with them?

Our friends have dived below the surface of the ocean. Can you see the boat above them?

They wore swimming goggles to prevent water from getting in their eyes. The goggles help them to see clearly under water.

Look! It's amazing what you can see under the water! 
Look at the patterns and colours of the different fishes around the corals.

Look at the many shapes of the corals. Corals are also a type of animal, although they look more like plants.

The divers are very careful of this spiny fish! They don't swim near to it.

It is very dangerous. The spines on this fish are poisonous.

What else can you see in this picture?

Look very carefully at the middle of this picture.

There is something hiding there. It is an octopus. It blends in with the colours and shapes around it. 

Look at the next page to see the octopus swimming.



These fish are sharks. Some types of sharks will eat humans, but not this type!

This type of shark is harmless. The divers swim near the sharks. 

It is nearly time to head back to the boat. The oxygen tanks are running low on oxygen.

For a while, the divers swim along with a turtle.

Then the turtle decides to eat a sea sponge for lunch. 

The divers continue on their way to the boat, which is waiting for them where they first dived into the water.

Look at these bright striped fish! Be careful of the anemone where the fish live.

Anemones can sting us with their poisonous tentacles. But a human touch is also harmful to an anemone!

Our friends have reached the boat. They will return to the surface of the water.

Can you see the ripples in the water from the boat far above them?

It is time to leave this underwater world. Our dive has come to an end.

That dive was wonderful!

------------------------------------------------------------



Why is the sky blue?

It is not always blue. Is it?

Why are leaves green?

They are not always green. Are they?

Why are bananas yellow?

Ripe bananas are yellow. Unripe bananas are green.

Why are umbrellas black?

Not all umbrellas are black.

Why is blood red?

There is iron in the blood. That makes it red.

Why is salt white?

I don't know!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Man was walking in the bush. 

Suddenly, he met Lion!

Lion was resting in the short grass.

The meeting was so sudden that Man did not know what to do. 

He was full of fear.

At first, Lion was surprised too, and a little afraid. 

But there was a low rumble in his stomach, because he was hungry.

Man suddenly found himself up a tall tree. 

He began to shout at Lion.

Lion lay down under the tree, waiting for his meal. 

As time went on, Lion fell asleep, or so it seemed.

Soon Man fell asleep. Then he woke up again. 

Finally he dozed off and went fast asleep.

But then he crashed down on the sleeping Lion!

They both woke up confused and frightened. 

Lion forgot his meal and ran for his life.

Man began to run in the same direction as Lion. 

Then he realized that he was running behind Lion!

So he changed direction and escaped. 

He was not eaten by Lion!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, all the wild animals got together to choose a king. 

They saw that it would be good to choose Lion to be the king of the animals.

At that meeting, they crowned Lion the king of the animals. As part of the ceremony, they had a big party that lasted a week. 

All of the animals attended the ceremony until the end. They ate, they drank, they sang and they danced.

When the ceremony was over, they all dispersed. They were returning to their homes. 

It was the custom for every animal to go and greet Lion because he was their king.

One visitor who came to greet King Lion was Hyena. When Hyena arrived at Lion's house, he found the king in bed. 

Lion told him, "I'm sick with an incurable illness."

Hyena responded, "O, Great King, don't be sad because of your illness. Hare knows the cure for this illness."

The reason Hyena said this was because he wanted to get Hare in trouble in the eyes of Lion. 

Hyena knew that Hare was unable to heal Lion. 

Lion cheered up and sent Hyena right away to call Hare.

Hyena ran to call Hare and said, "Let's go to the king, because he is very sick. He sent me to call you." 

Hare went to the king. "I have come, Great King! I heard that the king has need of me, and so I have come," said Hare.

Lion answered, "I am exceedingly happy to see you close to me, my Hare. I myself have called you,  because my life is hanging by a thread. 

I have an incurable illness. But Hyena whispered to me that you have the cure for this illness of mine."

And Hare replied, "You are correct, King Lion. I am able to heal this illness. But the medicine is very difficult to get." 

Lion replied, "Don't you worry, Hare, about this medicine being difficult to find. The bird that flies is the one that is caught. Come on now, tell us about this medicine!"

Hare said, "O my King, when I say that the medicine is hard to find I don't mean that it is far away. 

For you to be healed at once, you must make an ointment from the heart of a hyena."

When he heard that, Hyena started trembling all over. He was the very one who had told Lion that Hare knew the medicine for that illness. 

It was useless to now try to contradict Hare regarding the medicine.

So Hyena ran away and never again went to visit Lion.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ndimakonda masewero nthambo. 


I enjoy skipping.

Ine ndili ndekha. 


On my own.

Ndimakondanso masewero a nthambo ndi anzanga. 


I enjoy skipping with my friend too.

Ndimakonda kuwerenga nthano zabwino. 


I enjoy reading interesting stories.

Ndimakonda kuyenda mu dambo ndi anzanga. 


I enjoy walking in the field with my friends.

Ndimakonda kutsuka mbale za amai. 


I enjoy washing dishes for my mother.

Ndimakonda kulemba malembo akulu akulu amene sabvuta kuwerenga. 


I enjoy writing big letters which I can read easily.

Ndimakonda kudya zipatso zosiyana siyana. 


I enjoy eating different fruit.

Ndimakonda kugona pa bedi lalikulu. 


I enjoy sleeping on a big bed.

Ndimakonda kumvetsera ku nthano zabwino za amai. 


I enjoy listening to my mother's interesting stories.

Ndimakonda kucita zonse izi.  


I enjoy all these things.

------------------------------------------------------------



In my village, lives Mister Kio.

Mister Kio has a cat called Safi.

When Mister Kio goes to work, he leaves the door open.

Safi sits in the doorway to watch over the house.

When the neighbour's dog comes close, Safi scares him away.

The dog runs away.

When a neighbour knocks at the door, Safi is ready to scratch.

The neighbour turns and runs away.

When Safi is hungry, she closes the door.

Safi eats her food.

Afterwards, Safi jumps onto the sofa and sleeps, "Purr! Purr! Purr!"

When Mister Kio returns, Safi stretches happily and welcomes him home.

Mister Kio and Safi sit down.

Each of them reads the newspaper.

------------------------------------------------------------



Adiza was born in a small village in northern Ghana. She grew up surrounded by the vast savannah and the warmth of her close-knit community.

As a child, she was fascinated by the stories shared by her grandmother. Grandmother had traveled to distant lands and returned with tales of wonder and magic.

As Adiza grew older, her curiosity about the world beyond her village deepened. She longed to explore new cities, meet different people, and learn new things.

In her village, opportunities were limited, and girls were often expected to follow traditional paths.

Undeterred, Adiza worked hard to excel in school, earning top grades and recognition from her teachers.

She applied for scholarships and eventually won a spot at a prestigious school in Accra.

As Adiza thought of traveling to Accra, she felt a mix of excitement and nerves.

The city was overwhelming, with its towering buildings, honking horns, and bustling streets. 

But Adiza was determined to make the most of her opportunity.

She threw herself into her studies, joining clubs and organizations that aligned with her passions.

She made friends from all over the country and began to build a network of mentors and supporters.

Adiza's journey was not without its challenges. She faced financial struggles, homesickness, and self-doubt.

But she persevered, drawing on the wisdom of her grandmother and the support of her loved ones.

As Adiza approached graduation, she began to think about her next steps.

She had always dreamed of starting her own business, but she wasn't sure where to start. With the help of her mentors, she developed a business plan.

She launched her own social enterprise. Adiza's business focused on empowering women and girls in rural communities.

She wanted to provide them with access to education, healthcare, and economic opportunities.

She traveled back to her village and worked with the women there, using her skills and knowledge to make a positive impact.

As Adiza looked out at the women and girls she had helped, she felt a sense of pride and fulfillment.

She had come full circle, using her journey to make a difference in the world.

Adiza's grandmother had once told her, "The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step."

Adiza had taken that step, and it had led her to places she never could have imagined.

Young boys and girls in the community looked up to her and took their studies seriously.

They also aspired to be great leaders and help their young siblings and the community as a whole.

------------------------------------------------------------



Have you been to ǁHuiǃgaeb? There you will find a mountain called !;Kóu. 

The earth that covers the mountain is called !;'Âu.  

!;Kóu and !;'Âu are grandchildren of ǀKaggən, who is the Mantis and can transform all things into all things.

Around !;Kóu's neck is a necklace of tortoises with stones inside. The necklace is tied with the sinew of a baboon. 

That is why there are baboons all over the mountain !;Kóu. The baboons are always  looking for their brother with whose sinew the necklace was made.

Around !;Âu's neck is a string of calabashes with seeds that send shoots into her neck and make  growth all around her.

The necklace is tied with the bark of a tree.

Do you see the fire starting on the mountain? It starts with a tree. 

The tree comes looking for the bark that was taken to tie the calabashes around the neck of !;'Âu.  

The tree attacks with its roots. It is going to crush !;'Âu and !;Kóu.

|Kaggən the Mantis changes the husband of !;'Âu into a huge fire. 

He changes the daughter of !;'Âu into a haze that flickers above the fire.

The raging fire burns the grass. 

The trees get such a fright that they stumble a few steps back.

The fire licks at their roots and the smoke blows between their leaves.

The trees are so scared that they all run away in a thundering cloud of dust. 

The cloud soon disappears over the horizon.

Now the trees have left !;Kóu and !;'Âu.

For the time being.

They live together, sleeping above us. I wonder what will happen if they wake up?

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a young girl named Nadi, in a small village of Chipa.

Nadi was a kind child, known for her love for the animals in the village.

Her favourite friends were her three goats: Baba, Dada and Gaga.

She would spend hours playing and talking to them.

One day, dark clouds gathered in the sky, and the wind began to roar.

Cyclone Freddy was approaching. Everyone hurried to protect their belongings.

As the Cyclone drew nearer, the rain poured down. A disastrous landslide began. The villagers run for safety. 

Nadi had only one thought in her mind, to rescue her goats from danger!

The raindrops beat her face and the wind pulled at her dress. Nadi was determined to beat the Cyclone. 

She rushed to the hills where her goats were grazing.

Nadi reached the hilltop. She saw Gaga, Baba, and Dada huddled together, frightened by the roaring Cyclone.

Quickly, she tied them with a rope she had brought along.

Nadi used all her strength to guide her goats down the hill. The rocks and mud made the path difficult. 

Nadi's determination pushed her forward. She knew she must rescue herself and her goats.

The villagers watched in awe from a distance, praying for her safety. Slowly, Nadi and her goats made progress.

Just then, the landslide grew fiercer, causing the ground beneath them to shake.

Finally, Nadi managed to lead her goats to safety, away from the path of the landslide. 

She was tired and afraid, but relieved. She fell to the ground, hugging her goats tightly.

The story of Nadi and the destruction of Cyclone Freddy spread far and wide.

It reminded everyone that a hero can be anyone, even a brave little girl from a village in Malawi.

------------------------------------------------------------



These are giraffes. They have very long necks. They eat leaves from tall trees. What colour is a giraffe?

This is an elephant. The males have white tusks. They have large ears. Elephants have long trunks. They use their trunks to pick leaves off the tall trees. Elephants eat grasses and leaves. What colour is the elephant?

This is a crocodile. It lives in the rivers and lakes. It has a long tail. It has a wide mouth and many sharp teeth. It eats fish and other animals. What colour is the crocodile?

This is a lion. It has big, sharp teeth. Male lions have a mane. Where is the mane on this lion?

This is the crested crane. It is the symbol of Uganda. It has long legs and a crown. What are the colours of the crested crane?

These are water buffalo. They eats grasses and live near rivers and lakes. What does a water buffalo have growing on its head?

These animals are called zebras. They have black and white stripes. What other animal do you know that looks like a zebra?

Here are two different types of animals. There is a mother warthog with her babies. Warthogs have tusks too. How many warthogs can you count in the picture? The other animals are antelopes. They eat grasses. What colour is the antelope?

What types of animals do you see? Where do they live? Which one would you eat?

------------------------------------------------------------



I enjoy skipping. 

Cilandikonda kusotooka a mukalo.

Alone. 

Endikke.

I enjoy skipping with my friend too. 

Cilandikonda kusotooka mukalo abeenzuma.

I enjoy reading interesting stories. 

Cilandikonda kubala twaano tubotu.

I enjoy walking in the field with my friends. 

Cilandikonda kwendeenda mumbewu abeenzuma.

I enjoy washing utensils for my mother. 

Cilandikonda kusanzya mitiba yaba maama.

I enjoy writing big letters which I can read easily. 

Cilandikonda kulemba mabbala aabalika kabotu mapati.

I enjoy eating different fruits. 

Cilandikonda kulya michelo yindene-yindene.

I enjoy sleeping on a big bed. 

Cilandikonda koona abulo bupati.

I enjoy listening to my mother's interesting stories. 

Cilandikonda kuteelela twaano tubotu twabamaama.

I enjoy doing all these things! 

Cilandikonda kucita zyoonse ezi!

------------------------------------------------------------



My brother is reading a school book.

My mother is reading a bible.

My sister is reading a recipe book.

My uncle is reading a newspaper.

Granny is reading a magazine.

My little sister is reading a picture book.

I am reading this book.

Soon I will be able to read everything!

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there were two animals that were good friends. One was called Magezi Mataala Manene,  the other was called Kasiru Kasiira Katono. 

They used to live by sharing. Their friendship was so deep that they could share one white ant.

One day, Magezi Matala Manene made a suggestion. "Why don't we dig together as we eat together?" he asked. 

Kasiru Kasiira Katono replied, "Good idea. We should also store our food together." 

They both agreed to this.

Magezi Mataala Manene asked his friend, "Ee! Who will start the digging? Why don't you dig, and I will come to sow?" 

"Yes," replied Kasiru Kasiira Katono, and she dug a big garden. Then she told her friend, "Magezi Mataala Manene, I have finished digging. Come and sow millet."

Magezi Mataala Manene said, "You go on with the sowing, I will come and weed." So Kasiru Kasiira Katono went on with the sowing. 

When she finished she told her friend, "Grass has started to grow. Go and weed." But Magezi Mataala Manene replied, "No, you go on with weeding. I will harvest."

Kasiru Kasiira Katono went on with the weeding until the millet was ripe. 

At harvesting time she went to her friend and said, "Magezi Mataala Manene, I cultivated, and sowed, and weeded. Now come and harvest the millet."

Magezi Mataala Manene replied, "Not at all, I have no time! You go on and harvest. I will put it in the granary." Kasiru Kasiira Katono accepted this. She harvested the millet and took it home. 

She called Magezi Mataala Manene and said, "My friend, I have finished harvesting. Come and take the millet to the granary."

Magezi Mataala Manene replied, "I cannot lift all that millet. You put it in the granary. I will come during pounding." 

Kasiru Kasiira Katono said to her friend, "It seems you are simply tricking me." 

Magezi Mataala Manene replied, "No it's not true! Give me just one millet finger and you take the rest. I will pay you back."

Kasiru Kasiira Katono was not mean. She gave Magezi Mataala Manene one finger of millet, and they parted ways. 

Magezi Mataala Manene moved on, moved on,  moved on! He found a hen scratching the soil and eating stones. He said, "My in-law hen, instead of eating soil, have some of my millet."

Hen took the millet and ate. Magezi Mataala Manene looked and saw that the hen had eaten all the millet. 

He cried out, "Wuwiii! You have eaten all my millet. The millet was not mine, I borrowed it from Kasiru Kasiira Katono." 

Hen begged, "Since it is time for laying, I will lay one egg for you to take instead."

Magezi Mataala Manene got an egg from the hen. He moved on, moved on, moved on! He found some children shooting mangoes in a tree using stones. 

He told them, "If you want those mangoes to fall,  you should use this egg to shoot them down." He gave them the egg. 

When they used it to shoot the mangoes, it hit a branch and broke. The egg dripped down and the shell remained in the branches.

Magezi Mataala Manene cried out, "Wuwiii! You have broken my egg! The hen gave me the egg, but it was not mine. The egg was for the millet the hen ate. The millet was not mine. I borrowed the millet from Kasiru Kasiira Katono." 

The children whispered, "Don't shout like that. The owner of the mangoes will find us here. Instead of the egg take this mango."

Magezi Mataala Manene moved on, moved on, moved on! He came across a parrot eating an insect and asked, "Have you ever seen such a mango as this?" The parrot pierced the mango. 

Magezi Mataala Manene cried out, "Wuuwiii! You have burst my mango! The children gave me the mango, but it was not mine. The mango was for the egg the children broke. The hen gave me the egg,  but it was not mine. The egg was for the millet the hen ate. The millet was not mine. I borrowed it from Kasiru Kasiira Katono."

The parrot plucked out its most beautiful feather saying, "Here, take my feather instead of the mango." Magezi Mataala Manene took the feather and moved on, moved on, moved on. 

He came to a lake. When he was crossing, the feather slipped out of his hand and into the lake. He could not get the feather back. So he filled his mouth with water and kept it in his cheeks until he reached dry land. There he found the charcoal burners with their fire.

He opened his mouth, the water came out, and splashed on to the fire. The fire went out. The charcoal burners were pleased. 

Magezi Mataala Manene cried out, "Woweee! Your fire has taken my water. I got the water from the lake, but it was not mine. The water was for the feather that the lake took. The feather was for the mango that the parrot burst. The mango was for the egg that the children broke. The egg was for the millet that the hen ate. The millet was not mine. I borrowed it from Kasiru Kasiira Katono."

The charcoal burners said, "Here, take this axe instead of the water." Magezi Matala Manene took the axe and moved on, moved on, moved on! 

He came across butchers slaughtering a bull. He told the butchers, "Here is an axe for you to cut up the meat."

While the butchers were cutting the meat, the axe broke. 

Magezi Mataala Manene cried out, "Woweee! You have broken my axe. I got the axe from the charcoal burners, but it was not mine. The axe was for the water that the fire took. The water was for the feather that the lake took. The feather was for the mango that the parrot burst. The mango was for the egg that the children broke. The egg was for the millet that the hen ate. The millet was not mine. I borrowed it from Kasiru Kasiira Katono."

The butchers said, "Here, take the head and tail of the bull instead." Magezi Mataala Manene moved on, moved on, moved on! Until he got to a muddy swamp. 

He put the head of the bull on the mud. He also placed the tail in the mud. It looked as if the bull was stuck in the mud.

Magezi Mataala Manene began to shout, "Wu-lululu! Wu-lululu, wulululu! The king's bull has got stuck in the mud!" 

All the villagers came running. What concerns the king, concerns everyone. A crowd soon gathered around the head and tail. They asked, "Now what do we do?"

Magezi Mataala Manene advised, "Some of you pull the tail, and some of you pull the head. We will pull the bull from the mud." 

The people took his advice. "Ready! One, two, three,  pull! Come out nowwwww!" they shouted. 

The villagers fell down over each other from the effort of pulling. Two were still holding the head. One held up the tail.

Magezi Mataala Manene cried out, "Wo wee! You have pulled apart the king's bull. Each one of you must give one bull for the king." 

Quickly, the people went back to their homes. Quickly, they returned with a bull each. And so Magezi Mataala Manene left with a herd of bulls to return to his friend Kasiru Kasiira Katono.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, there lived a girl whose name was Kalabushe. Kalabushe was a very talkative girl.

Although her mother warned her not to talk too much, Kalabushe did not listen.

Kalabushe's aunt lived across the valley on the other side of Kalabushe's village.

One day she fell ill. She had nobody to take care of her.

Kalabushe's mother was very busy.

It was late in the evening when she gave Kalabushe food to take to her sick aunt.

On the way, Kalabushe met Sinson.

Sinson was a hyena who had changed into a person.

Sinson asked Kalabushe, "What are you carrying?"

Kalabushe answered, "I am carrying meat, eggs and milk."

Kalabushe's mother had warned her not to say what she was carrying.

Kalabushe also said, "I am taking the food to my sick aunt."

Sinson licked his lips at the thought of the meat that Kalabushe was carrying.

Sinson quickly ran ahead of Kalabushe to her aunt's house.

He swallowed Kalabushe's aunt and then covered himself with her blanket.

When Kalabushe arrived, the house was very quiet.

She went inside and called out, "Aunt, where are you?"

Kalabushe did not hear her aunt's voice. She went to the inner room where her aunt slept.

She was surprised when she saw someone covered with a big blanket.

Kalabushe asked, "Aunt, why are your ears so big today?"  

Sinson replied from under the big blanket, "So that I can hear you well."

Kalabushe asked again, "Aunt, why are your eyes so big today?" 

Sinson answered, "So I can see you well."

Kalabushe finally asked, "Aunt, why is your mouth so big today?" 

Sinson replied, "So I can eat you up!" He jumped from the bed and swallowed Kalabushe.

Kalabushe kept talking even when she was inside Sinson's stomach.

She asked many questions.

In the end, Sinson was so tired of Kalabushe's many questions that he decided to spit her out.

Kalabushe and her aunt were rescued by the villagers. 

From that day, Kalabushe did not talk too much to strangers.

------------------------------------------------------------





























------------------------------------------------------------



Anansi the Spider, and Rabbit were friends. They lived in a peaceful village in the mountains. 

Rabbit owned a big farm with lots of vegetables and fruit. Even though Rabbit shared generously with his friend, Anansi was unhappy and jealous.

So Anansi thought of a clever plan to take over Rabbit's farm. Soon Rabbit was left poor and homeless. 

Anansi was the proud owner of all Rabbit's land, vegetables, and fruit.

Anansi went to the market to sell his fruit and vegetables. He made so much money that he filled a big basket with it! 

With some of the money, he bought maize for his family, and put it on top of the money in the basket.

Anansi happily headed home with his basket on his head, singing. 

He was thinking about all the things he was going to buy with his money.

On the way, it started to drizzle. Soon the drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. 

Anansi the Spider left his basket on the side of the road to shelter under a tree. But from there he kept a close watch on his precious basket.

It started to rain even more heavily, and Anansi was getting cold and wet. So he ran into a hole. 

"I will stay in this hole until the rain stops," said Anansi to himself. "At least my money is protected by the maize I put on top of it."

A little while later, Vulture was flying around and spotted the basket on the side of the road. He saw that there was money and maize in the basket. 

So he covered the basket with his wings and waited for the rain to stop.

Anansi saw Vulture sitting on his basket. "Oh thank you, my friend, for protecting my basket," he said to the Vulture. 

"Excuse me, Anansi, did I hear you right?" asked Vulture. "Your basket? This basket is mine! I found it here on the road side!" Anansi could not believe his ears! "It's mine, I tell you!"

Furious, Anansi reported the theft to the chief. But Vulture said to the chief and his elders, "How could anyone leave a basket full of money and maize unguarded on the road?" 

"But I was watching my basket. It's my money and my maize!" said Anansi. "I was looking after the basket when you came and said it was yours!" replied Vulture.

When the chief and his elders had listened carefully to both sides, they sent Anansi and Vulture away. 

They discussed the story for a long time. Eventually they reached a decision.

They summoned Anansi and the Vulture again. "We believe Vulture's story," they said. "He is not the thief. You were trying to claim something that was not yours." 

Anansi could not believe his ears! He burst into tears.

The news soon spread that the judgement had gone against Anansi. As he walked away, he heard Rabbit laughing and laughing. 

Rabbit went back to his farm and grew fruit and vegetables. But Anansi was poor again, with no friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



It was the unusually hot summer holidays. 

Nomfundo and her family were visiting their relatives in Durban. Inside the house it was as hot as the sun itself.

After lunch, Nomfundo took her book and went to cool down at the forest near the house.

The shade of the two tallest trees gave her enough shade to stay there for a while.

There was nothing but the sound of birds. How peaceful!

Suddenly, Nomfundo felt something hit her head. "What could that be?"

She saw a tiny book next to her. She thought it was her imagination. "I only brought one book here, where is this one coming from?"

She looked up the tree, around the tree but did not see anyone.

Then she saw the tiniest animal looking down at her.

It was a dormouse, a rare and very shy kind of mouse made completely of fur.

They are only found in Asia, Europe and Africa.

Nomfundo looked up again, and this time she saw the dormouse's nose peeping through the branches.

"Hello, I'm Nomfundo. Have you lost something?" Nomfundo asked the dormouse.

The small furry rodent squealed in fright and hid behind a leaf.

Then the dormouse moved forward again and spoke with a timid voice, "Hello, I'm Bushy. I lost my book."

"I was reading when suddenly a wind blew up," explained Bushy.

"I will return your book to you," said Nomfundo.

"How? You are down there and I am up here," replied Bushy.

But Nomfundo was already running home! She had an idea.

Nomfundo went to get the helium balloons that her little brother got for his birthday. 

She ran back to the forest with the balloons and tied them on a string, around her waist.

She floated up the tree.

"Welcome to the forest canopy," squealed an excited Bushy.

Nomfundo gave the tiny book to Bushy. 

As a token of friendship, Nomfundo took off one of her ribbons and presented it to Bushy.

Bushy tied the ribbon on her tail and the two were friends from that moment.

"Come, let's explore the forest canopy," said Bushy.

"We must go quietly here, the fruit bat is asleep," whispered Bushy.

Bats search for food at night and sleep during the day. 

They sleep high up in the trees to stay safe from predators.

Next, they came across a colourful frog.

"Hello Benji, how are you?" Bushy asked the frog.

Benji was surprised to see a human in the tree tops! Nomfundo was surprised to see a frog up there!

Tree frogs live most of their lives in trees.

Suddenly, Nomfundo heard a loud crying sound! It was a bird calling the dormouse.

"There's a human! Why is she here?" squawked the Hornbill. 

"Nomfundo is my friend from the world on the ground," replied Bushy.

"Please don't be afraid," said Nomfundo, holding out her hand.

The animals welcomed Nomfundo and shared their food with her. 

But the day is coming to an end, and Nomfundo must leave her friends.

She will return to the ground feeling very happy.
 
What a good day she had!

------------------------------------------------------------



It's another day to go to the hairdresser.

I cannot wait to meet Ms. Luso. She is the coolest person ever.

She is smart and knows everything about hair. She knows the right way to style your hair. 

She knows the history of different hairstyles.

Ms. Luso always has a funny story or joke to tell.

I have to force myself to sit still in her chair. I giggle throughout.

Most important of all, Ms. Luso styles my hair differently each time.

She has done Bantu knots.

The other day, I was in Goddess braids with curls.

Before that, she styled it in cornrows.

Last month, I left her salon in Pigtails.

I have yet to try Afro Puff.

She also promised me the Fulani braids.

I would also love a braided Ponytail.

Ms. Luso makes me feel special.

Each time I come out of her salon, I look different.

Thank you, Ms. Luso.

You make my hair look very special.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mmabotse lived with her granny in a village called Ga-Nchabeleng.

Her mother worked far from home and only returned at the end of the month. Mmabotse loved her granny very much.

Granny had a large maize field. She went to the field every day to check on the plants. 

Her maize grew very tall – so tall that you could not see granny!

Every time Mmabotse came back from school she would call her granny. "Granny, where are you?" she would shout. But granny couldn't hear her. 

Mmabotse worried when she could not find granny.

Mmabotse asked her mother to buy a cell phone for granny. "I will teach granny how to use the phone. It will be easy to find her in the fields," said Mmabotse. 

Mmabotse's mother bought a phone for granny.

Mmabotse taught her granny how to answer the phone. 

She said, "Granny, when you hear the phone ringing, press this green button and put the phone next to your ear to hear. Then start talking."

Mmabotse  continued, "When you have finished the call, press this red button." 

She practised with granny many times.

Mmabotse came back from school and called her granny on the cell phone. 

Her granny answered the phone and came back home. Now it was easy to find granny.

Granny was very happy to be able to use a cell phone. She liked to call Mmabotse's mother and many others.

She said to Mmabotse, "I love you. You have a good heart just like your name."

------------------------------------------------------------



One time, there was a great famine in the land. No one had anything to eat except the crows. Each morning they flew a long distance to where there was a tree with ripe figs in the middle of a wide river. 

They always flew back with the figs for themselves and their relatives. The sight of so many figs made Anansi's mouth water. How could he get them for himself?

He thought of a plan. He carefully covered his bottom with sticky beeswax. Then he took a piece of clay pot and went to see the crows. "Please could you help me?" he asked. "I need a live coal to get my fire going again." 

As they were getting the coal from the fire, Anansi carefully sat firmly on one of the largest figs. It stuck to his bottom. He thanked the crows, and hurried home to enjoy the fig.

But one fig wasn't enough for him. He went back a second time, and did the same. When he went back a third time, the crows began to get suspicious. "Why do you keep coming back to us to get a coal?" they said. 

Anansi answered, "Every time when I get home, the coal has burnt out." "You're lying!" said the crows. "You just want our food!" "That's not true," said Anansi. And he started crying.

The crows felt sorry for him. The next morning at first light, each crow gave him a feather. He flew with them to the fig tree in the middle of the wide river. When he saw the luscious figs, Anansi wanted them all for himself. 

Each time a crow tried to pick a fig, he shouted out, "That one is mine! I saw it first!" And then he took the fig and put it into his bag. Eventually he had all the figs and the crows had none.

He was left all alone as the darkness began to fall. "If I don't want to stay in this tree for the rest of my life," he said to himself, "I'll just have to jump into the air like the crows." 

So he took a deep breath, jumped, and PLOP! He fell into the river right among the crocodiles.

"What do we have here?" said a gruff crocodile voice. "A tasty morsel to eat." 

"Oh please don't," said Anansi. And he began to cry. "I'm one of you, don't you know? I got lost in the days of your grandfathers and no one was able to find me. You're the first of my relatives I've ever met!" He cried so much that the crocodiles felt sorry for him.

The oldest crocodile said, "We'll know you're one of us if you can eat and enjoy mud soup just like we do." They gave him a pot of dirty brown water. 

"Just like my grandmother used to make it!" Anansi said. But he made a hole in the ground with his back foot, and a hole in the pot with his front foot. As he pretended to drink the soup, it oozed down through the pot into the hole beneath his feet.

"Delicious!" he exclaimed, giving back the empty pot. "Now we know you are definitely one of us," the crocodiles said. 

So they allowed Anansi to sleep in their hole with them for the night. "Tomorrow morning I'll tell you the story of my life," said Anansi as they fell asleep.

Early the next morning, before first light, Anansi woke up one of the crocodiles. "I want to go and fetch my wife and children from across the river, so that they can help me tell my story. Will you help me before the others wake up?" he asked the crocodile.

The crocodile was grumpy at being woken up so early. "Please help me! You swim much faster than I do," Anansi said. 

The crocodile agreed, and Anansi rode on his back to the bank of the river. He climbed off quickly. "I'll be back soon! Don't go away!" Anansi said, as he disappeared through the grass.

As far as we know, the crocodile is waiting for him still, with just his long snout and his beady eyes above the surface of the river.

------------------------------------------------------------



Fire, Water, Truth and Lies were friends.

But Lies was not happy and wanted to destroy their friendship.

One day Lies said, "Why don't we all go and look for free land. Then each one of us can have a kingdom?" 

They agreed and started walking.

Lies went to Water and said, "Fire is our worst enemy. She burns everything. We need to find a kingdom without her around."

Water said, "What should we do?"

Lies replied, "Obviously we'll have to kill her. You are the only one with the power to do that. When she is sitting down,  splash on her and destroy her!"

Water said, "If I do that I'll spill on the earth and won't be able to become one again."

But Lies said, "No problem, I'll put some stones down, so you won't spill away. I will collect you again." Lies put down stones to collect Water.

When the unsuspecting Fire sat down, Water poured all over her.

This way, Lies got rid of Fire and they went on their way.

After some time, Lies said to Water, "Look, why don't you sit at the top of this cliff to enjoy the scenery?"

When Water sat down, Lies sneaked up and pulled the stones from under her.

She spilled away, and that was the end of her.

Now, Lies had to get rid of Truth.

When they came to a big mountain, Lies told Truth to wait at the bottom of the mountain.

He pushed down a big stone to crush Truth.

When the stone crashed down, diamonds and gold and all sorts of valuable things fell out.

Truth managed to crawl out from the broken stone.

Lies came down to look at the body of Truth. Instead, he saw all the valuable things.

He asked, "Where did these come from?"

Truth said, "When the stone landed on me, this is what came out." Lies wanted these valuable things too.

He said, "I'll go down to the bottom of the mountain. You go up and push down another big stone."

So, Truth went up and pushed down a big stone.

The stone landed on Lies' head and crushed him to death.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, mother was cooking. She called, "Abena, Ajua, Akwasi, Aku, food is ready!  Bring your plates!"  

Mother gave each of them some fufu. She gave them some soup. Then she gave them some meat. She said to them, "Go and sit down and eat."

Aku looked at her fufu. She looked at her soup. Then she looked at her meat. She put her plate down angrily and cried. Mother asked, "Aku, what is wrong with you?"

"My meat is the smallest," Aku cried. "But you are the youngest," mother said.

Aku cried harder. She threw herself on the ground. Mother did not want Aku to cry. She called loudly, "Abena, Ajua, Akwasi, bring your food quickly!"

The children brought their food. "Now Aku, pick the meat you like," mother said.

Aku smiled happily. She looked hard at Akwasi's meat and thought, "Akwasi's meat is big." 

She looked hard at Ajua's meat, and thought, "Ajua's meat is bigger." 

She looked hard at Abena's meat. Abena's meat was the biggest. She said to mother, "I want Abena's meat."

"Abena, give your meat to Aku and take hers," mother said. Abena was unhappy.  But she did not want to disobey mother. So she gave her meat to Aku. 

"Mmmm, this meat will be sweet," Aku said. She sat on a stool and ate happily.

Pii! Pii! It was the ice cream man outside. He rode a big bicycle with a small horn. 

Aku loved ice cream. "Abena, get my bag," mother said. "I want to buy ice cream for all of you." Abena brought mother's bag.

"Four ice creams, please," mother said to the ice cream man. She paid and gave each child an ice cream. 

"One, two, three, four," counted Aku. She looked at her ice cream. It was small. She looked hard at Akwasi's ice cream.  It was smaller than hers.

She looked harder at Ajua's ice cream. It was the smallest of all. She was happy. "My ice cream is the biggest," she thought. 

"Wait," she thought. "I must see Abena's ice cream too." She moved closer to Abena. Then she opened her mouth wide and cried.

"What is the matter, Aku?" mother asked.  

"Abena's ice cream is bigger than mine," she cried. Mother said, "Aku you are a greedy girl!" 

Aku cried harder.  She threw herself on the ground. Mother was unhappy. She did not want Aku to cry.

Mother said to Abena, "Please give your ice cream to Aku and take hers." 

Abena was unhappy, but she did not want to disobey mother. She gave the ice cream to Aku. Aku's eyes shone with happiness. She looked at the big ice cream and smiled.

"Mmmm, this ice cream looks good," said Aku. She opened her mouth wide and took a big bite. 

"Ajiish!" she shouted suddenly and spat out the ice cream.

"What is the matter now?" mother asked. "This ice cream is bitter," wailed Aku.

Mother took Aku's ice cream and bit into it. She frowned. "There is something wrong with this. It is spoilt," she said. 

Then mother added, "Sorry Aku, you cannot have another one. Now do you see that it is bad to be greedy?"

------------------------------------------------------------



To create your storybook page-by-page, start with the storybook cover picture. 

The picture must be flat on a surface before you take the photograph.

Take photographs of pictures inside or outside, wherever the light is good. Check for shadows on the page if there is sun.

Keep your hands still - try to avoid shaking and blurring the photo. (If the camera has anti-shake, check it is switched on.)

You can also use artificial light inside, or work next to a window. 

Check for shadows if the light is directly above you.

Use the crop and zoom tool on the App.

You can crop the picture square, or zoom in on a detail.

Type the story text for each page.

Remember to save each page!

Work in progress.

Completed!

The storybook can also be published on the African Storybook website.

------------------------------------------------------------



Edda waliwo omusajja nga ye Nsangabisibe. 

There was a man called Nsangabisibe.

Omusajja ono yalina mutabani nga ye Mudduawulira. 

Nsangabisibe had a son called Mudduawulira.

Lumu taata yagamba mutabaniwe nti, "Jangu tutambuleko."

One day, the man said to his son, "Let's go for a walk."

Bwe baali batambula, nebasanga omugugu omusibe obulungi ennyo. Omugugu nga gusanyusa okulaba.

They found a very beautiful suitcase by the roadside.  It was packed full.

Taata nakwatibwa amaddu nagamba Mudduawuliranti, "Situla omugugu ogwetike tugutwale eka."

"The man got very excited. He said to his son, "Pick it up and we will take it home."

Omwana nasitula omugugu neyetikka. 

The son picked the suitcase and carried it on his head.

Batambulako katono, omusota neguva mumugugu negumugwa kubigere!

On the way home, a snake slithered out of the suitcase. It landed on Mudduawulira's feet!

Taata ne mutabaniwe batya nnyo era. Nebasuula omugugu nebadduka! 

Father and son were both very scared. They dropped the suitcase and ran away very fast!

------------------------------------------------------------



Many people in this village were living in poverty.

Chief Kyemba, their leader, advised them, "Look for the wealth in the soil."

But they did not understand and did not pay attention to his words.

A small boy called Mutaka lived in this village.

Mutaka caught a lot of birds. He used to eat the whole bird. He even ate the liver and intestines.

One day Mutaka caught a dove in a tree.

When the dove saw that Mutaka had him, it cried out, "My friend, leave me and I tell you what you need to know."

Mutaka said, "Tell me. Then I will eat you!"

The dove spoke while changing its colour from grey to purple.

"Let me go to that tree over there, and then I will tell you more."

Mutaka let the dove go and it flew to the tree.

When it reached there, it laughed at Mutaka. "Wealth is in meee!" called the dove.

Mutaka asked, "What are you saying?"

"Inside me is gold!" replied the bird. "You were stupid to release me. You have missed a lot of wealth," the dove tormented Mutaka.

Then the bird passed out droppings that looked like gold. It flew to a taller tree.

Mutaka started to scratch the ground around the tree.

He called out to the villagers, "Come with me, we can all scratch for wealth in the ground."

To this day, Mutaka and the villagers are scratching the ground looking for gold.

The dove continues to sing in the tree that, "Wealth is in meee!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Eyes

Ears

Mouth

Nose

Chin

Teeth

Tongue

Cheeks

Eyebrows

Hair

------------------------------------------------------------



Hello, nice to meet you! 

My name is Bohlale. 

I am nine years old. 

How old are you?

This is my family. I am the youngest and my Gogo is the oldest. 

I have one brother. He is two years older than me. I also have a sister. She is three years older than my brother. 

What are the ages of my brother and sister?

My siblings are allowed to go to the mountains to collect fruit, and to go to the river. 

I would love to do those things as well. Everyone always tells me that I am too young, too small, too weak, and not brave enough yet.

I wish my family would believe in me!

Gogo comes into my room. She kisses me and says, "Goodnight." 

Then she whispers in my ear, "Always remember that I believe in you."

I fall asleep. In my dream, I find a message in a bottle. The message is:

"If you want to be brave, follow the map to the highest mountain. There you will find a special drink. 

One sip of that drink will make you the bravest girl in the world."

I am not as wise as my Gogo. I am not as strong as my brother nor as brave as my sister. 

But if I find this drink, then I will be able to do anything.

Help me to follow the map, count 50 steps straight ahead. 

1, 2, 3,

47, 48, 49, 50 steps! 

Oh no, a river! How will I make it to the other side? I think I will give up because I cannot swim.

Look at that leaf floating on the water! 

I have got an idea.

I can build a raft! 

Here are five tree branches. How many more branches do I need to build a raft with eleven branches? 

After building the raft, I can cross the river without swimming. Where will I go next?

After 100 steps, I think am lost! Where is the mountain?

I will never find the way to the highest mountain. I think I have to give up because I am too small.

The giraffe can see the mountain because it is very tall. 

If I climb this tree, I will be as tall as a giraffe! 

I can see how far away the mountain is.

I climb down from the tree.

After 200 steps, I am at the foot of the highest mountain. 

There is a cave, with scary eyes looking at me! 

I think I will give up because I am afraid.

Look again carefully, those scary eyes are only fireflies. 

The fireflies could help to guide me through the cave to the top of the mountain.

Here I am at the top of the mountain! 

How many steps did I walk in total?

I can see the special drink of bravery! I am going to drink it now.

"Good mooooorning!" says Gogo.

I wake up suddenly!

"Gogo, I had a dream." I tell Gogo about the message and my journey.

"I am still not as wise as you. I am still not as strong as my brother nor as brave as my sister."

Gogo smiles and says, "Are you telling me that you are not brave enough? How did you get to the highest mountain? How did you walk through the cave?

You do not need that special drink, because you ARE brave!"

Questions
1. How many siblings does Bohlale have?
2. What was in the bottle in her dream?
3. How did she cross the river?
4. Which animal gave her the idea to climb a tree?
5. What did she see in the cave?
6. What did she find on top of the mountain?

------------------------------------------------------------



Here is Aliko the farmer.

Aliko lives in a small village called Mempasem.

Aliko has a big farm.

Aliko leaves the house very early every morning to go to his farm.

At the farm he weeds.

He makes sure that his crops grow well.

He grows many crops on his farm.

He has plantain, banana, cassava, yam, cocoyam, okro, tomatoes and coconut.

In the afternoon when the sun is hot, Aliko takes a rest under a shady tree on the farm. 

He also eats the food he brings from home.

After eating and resting for a while, Aliko goes back to work on the farm.

During harvest time, Aliko sells some of his crops at the market.

Aliko is proud to be a farmer.

------------------------------------------------------------



Everyone knows that elephants have long noses.

But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat.

A baby elephant was born. 

She was very curious. She had a question for every animal.

She was curious about Giraffe.

"Why do you have a long neck?" she asked.

She was curious about Rhino. 

"Why does your horn have a sharp point?" she asked.

She was very curious about Crocodile. 

"What do crocodiles eat for dinner?" she asked.

Clever Crow quickly said, "Follow me to the river. There you will see what crocodiles eat for dinner."

So Baby Elephant followed Crow to the river.

She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank.  

She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?

"Hello," said a stone near the river bank. "Hello," said Baby Elephant. 

"Can you tell me what crocodiles eat for dinner?" she asked.

"Come closer and I will tell you," said the stone. 

Baby Elephant bent down. "Come closer," said the stone. Baby Elephant bent down lower.

Suddenly, snap! 

Crocodile grabbed Baby Elephant's nose in his jaws.

Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. And pulled, and pulled. 

But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.

Baby Elephant's nose stretched and stretched. 

And stretched. Until she fell over. "Dufff!"

Baby Elephant's short nose had stretched into a long nose.

Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches. 

And to this day, all elephants have long and useful trunks.

------------------------------------------------------------



Oscar has a problem with his eyes. 

He cannot see any fish.

But he will not eat his carrots.

Johnnie the seahorse says, "Oscar, eat your carrots!"

But Oscar does not like the taste of carrots.

"Carrots will help you to see better," says Johnnie.

Oscar goes to the doctor. 

Oscar and Johnnie wait for Dr Shakes.

Dr Shakes says, "Glasses will help you to see better."

Oscar does not want to wear glasses.

But they help Oscar see the fishes. 

Now he eats his carrots with fish!

------------------------------------------------------------



Lumbazi would have been a good place, but everything was wrong about its environment.

There were broken bottles everywhere. Pieces of paper littered the streets and the air smelled very bad.

Children got injured from broken bottles.

When it was windy, pieces of paper flew and hung on trees and roofs.

This kept many people away from visiting Lumbazi.

One day, 9-year-old Chike shared an idea with his friends. 

"Let us clean our environment together. We can sweep, pick up broken bottles and  make waste bins for our houses and streets."

"This will help us stay clean. It will attract other communities to visit us," Chike continued.

As he spoke, Obi said, "I will carefully pick up the broken bottles. I will place them where they won't injure us."

Felix said, "I will bring one of the old buckets in my house so we can use it as a trash can."

They worked together every day.

 Since that day, Lumbazi became a healthy and safe place for everyone to stay.

------------------------------------------------------------



Chilli Peppers

Cabbage

Pumpkin

Peas

Peach

Bananas

Strawberries

Watermelon

Granadillas

Green Beans

Bell Pepper

Okra

Lettuce

Maize

Aubergine

Tomato

Carrot

Pineapple

Papayas

Avocado

Mango

Apple

Guavas

Sweet Potatoes

Ginger

Garlic

Onions

Potatoes

Oranges

Lemons

Radish

Tangerine

Cherries

Grapes

------------------------------------------------------------



Everyone knows that the elephant has a very long nose.

But a long time ago, the elephant's nose was short and fat. Like a shoe in the middle of its face.

One day a baby elephant was born. She was curious about everything. 

She had a question for every animal.

She was curious about Giraffe. 

"Why do you have a long neck?" she asked.

She was curious about Rhino. 

"Why does your horn have a sharp point?"

She was curious about Hippo. 

"Why do you have red eyes?" she asked.

And she was VERY curious about Crocodile. 

"What does Crocodile eat for dinner?" she asked.

"Never ask a question like that!" said her mother. 

Then she walked off, frowning.

Quickly Crow flew down to Baby Elephant. 

"Follow me to the river. There you will see what Crocodile eats for dinner," squawked Crow.

So the baby elephant followed Crow down to the river.

She pushed through the reeds and stood on the bank. 

She looked into the water. Where was Crocodile?

"Hello," said a stone near the river bank. 

"Hello," said Baby Elephant. "Can you tell me what Crocodile eats for dinner?" she asked.

"Bend down and I will tell you," said the stone. "Lower, lower," said the stone. 

So Baby Elephant bent down lower, and lower.

Then suddenly, "Snap!" Baby Elephant's nose was caught in Crocodile's jaws. 

"Crocodile will eat you for dinner!" squawked Crow, and flew away.

Baby Elephant sat back on her strong legs and pulled. She pulled, and pulled. 

But Crocodile did not let go of her nose.

Baby Elephant's nose stretched, and stretched, and stretched. 

Then, "Thud!" she fell on her back.

Crocodile sunk back into the water. 

He was cross about losing his dinner.

Baby Elephant looked at her nose. 

It was stretched very long. She could not see where it ended!

Her nose was so long she could pick fruit from high branches.

Her nose was so long she could shower her back with water. 

From that day, all elephants had long and useful trunks.

------------------------------------------------------------



The rains did not come. The land was very dry.

This monkey left home to look for water and food.

She walked over hills and valleys.

She came to a place named Tirkol.

Monkey was very happy in this place.

She ate fruit and got fat. But she missed her friends.

So Monkey made the long journey home.

The other monkeys were joyful to see her.

"Where is this wonderful place with fruit?" they asked her.

"I will take you there," said Monkey.

The other monkeys loved Tirkol. They decided to stay there forever.

But the monkeys from Tirkol were worried.

"These new monkeys will eat all our fruit," they said.

The Tirkol monkeys went to attack the new monkeys.

"Why fight?" asked an elder. "There is enough fruit for all!"

This was true. So the monkeys decided to live together peacefully.

------------------------------------------------------------



My heart feels a lot of things.

I feel happy when my granny tells us stories in the evening.

I feel silly when I play with my friend.

I feel bad when my dad says he does not have money.

I feel loved when my mom gives me a hug.

------------------------------------------------------------



Shokoyagi and father are making breakfast.

Shokoyagi eats a spoonful.

This needs sugar!

Father adds sugar.

Yuck!

This is salty!

What could be the problem?

'S' for Sugar. 

'S' for Salt.

What do you think happened?

------------------------------------------------------------



Kabali and Kateera are friends.

Kabali has a cat. Kateera has a rabbit.

Kabali plays with his cat every day.

Kateera feeds his rabbit twice a day.

Kateera's rabbit produced six babies.

Two rabbits were black. Two rabbits were brown. Two rabbits were white.

Kabali's cat produced three babies.

One kitten was male. Two kittens were female.

Kateera sold four of the baby rabbits.

He used the money to buy books and pencils for school.

Kabali did not sell any kittens.

The people in the village did not want cats.

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived a beautiful girl.

One day she was very hungry. She thought of ways of getting something to eat.

She met a man who asked her, "How are you young girl? What makes you sad?"

The girl answered, "I am hungry."

The man was sorry for the girl. He told her there was a feast in the neighbourhood and she should go and steal food.

The girl had never stolen before.

The girl stood up quickly and went to the home that was holding the feast.

When she got near, she forgot the instructions on how to steal. She sang repeatedly:

I have come to steal food, f-o-o-d, I am walking slowly, slo-wly.

People heard the song of the girl from far until she got into the homestead.

People were amazed by the nature of the song and asked her, "Where do you come from? What do you want? Why are you singing?"

The girl told them how hungry she was and they gave her food.

Later, she was advised that stealing is bad!

------------------------------------------------------------



My friend gave me beans from her garden.

I plant a bean in the soil.

The bean germinates in the soil.

The seedling grows up to the sun.

The root grows down.

The seedling sprouts above the soil.

The seedling grows,

and grows.

I plant more beans.

The plants grow,

and grow.

The plants produce bean pods.

The plants grow up, up, over my wall!

I pick the bean pods when they are dry.

I collect the beans from the pods.

I cook the beans with red onion and herbs.

These beans are ready to eat.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Cat.

This is Dog.

Cat and Dog live in a house. 

A house with a door. 

A house with a roof.

Cat and Dog have a ball. 

The ball is red and blue and green.

Cat and Dog play with the ball. 

Cat throws the ball to Dog. Dog catches the ball. 

Dog throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.

Then Cat throws the ball very high.

Oh! oh!

The ball is on the roof. 

The ball is on the roof of the house.

Cat and Dog can see the ball. 

Cat and Dog cannot get to the ball.

Cat and Dog cry. 

Then Elephant comes by.

Elephant is big. Elephant can see the ball. Elephant can get to the ball. 

Elephant gets the ball from the roof. Elephant takes the ball from the roof of the house.

Elephant gives the ball to Cat and Dog. 

Cat and Dog smile. Elephant smiles. 

Cat and Dog and Elephant smile.

Cat and Dog and Elephant play with the ball. Cat throws the ball to Dog. Dog catches the ball. Dog throws the ball to Elephant. 

Elephant catches the ball. Elephant throws the ball to Cat. Cat catches the ball.

Bye bye Cat.

Bye bye Dog. 

Bye bye Elephant.



------------------------------------------------------------



I am a duck. 

I hatched from an egg.

I spend a lot of time around water.

I dabble in the ponds. 

I love getting wet.

I waddle with my webbed feet.

I wiggle with my tail.

My mouth is called a bill.

I quack and drink with it.

I play in the grass. 

I play around in ponds.

Do you think I sleep in a nest?

------------------------------------------------------------



The drum has always been an important musical instrument in our community. We love drums!

We have drums of different sizes: big, medium-sized and small.

We play drums using beaters, or with our fingers. 

We play drums for various reasons. We play drums with songs and dances, for feasts and in bad times.

Drums enrich songs and make people want to dance. Drums make ceremonies colourful.

We play drums during ceremonies for marriage and child naming. We play drums when celebrating a new harvest or a twin birth.

We sound drums to announce grief and call people when death occurs.

We sound drums to call people to clean wells, clear roads, or to build a hut for a needy old person. 

We sound drums to call people when cattle are stolen in our village.

We sound drums to gather people for meetings at our chief's palace.

Drums call people to go to church for prayers on Sundays, and other prayer days. 

We also play drums to enrich songs when singing in churches.

The big drum sounds, "An a bul mba, an a bul mba-mba-mba-mba bul." The small drums sing in their high pitches, "Tindiri, tindiri tindiri ti."

Together they chorus, "Tindiri mba, tindiri mba-mba-mba-mba, tindiri ti!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Kwame is a young ambitious boy who lived in a small town called Nhyieaso. He was determined to be one of the greatest athletes in the world. Despite having no formal training, no professional equipment, and limited support,

Kwame dreamt of becoming a world champion. 

Kwame realized his talent during his school athletic competitions. He usually trained with both children and adult in his neighborhood.

Despite his speed, his community was doubtful. They often discourage him and rather encourage him to focus on school activities.
With no coach or training facilities, Kwame trained alone in the streets of Nhyieaso.

He has no sporting kits, but he was determined to run. He wakes up early, running miles before sunrise .

He used to go to the nearby town to watch athletes during sports festival  . His only support comes from his younger sister, Dufie, who looked up to him and believed in his talent.

One day, Kwame heard about a national youth athletic competition. His family has no money to support him to take part in the competition. Dufie saw his determination and looked for money to assist  him register for the race.

The community saw his determination, others  started to mock at him, calling him all kinds of names. An elderly man saw him and offered him one of his old sportswear to help with his journey.

On the eve of the event, Kwame saw his competitors and felt intimidated. ' the other runners have professional training kits.

The race began, he was initially left behind. But as he runs, he remembered the hours he spent on Nhyieaso’s rough road and the faces of those who doubted him.

He pushed his body to its limits, passing runner after runner until he crossed the finish line among the top competitors.

Kwame did not win the race, but he finished among the top five, a great achievement considering his circumstances. His performance catches the attention of a coach who offered him a spot in one of the best training academy.

Back in Nhyieaso, Kwame returned as a local hero. The community that once doubted him saw him as an inspiration. Children began running beside him, eager to train and follow his example.

------------------------------------------------------------



Anansi and Rabbit were friends. 

Anansi was jealous of Rabbit's wealth.

Anansi took over Rabbit’s farm. 

He chased away Rabbit.

Anansi sold all the crops. 

He got a lot of money.

Anansi went home carrying his basket on his head.

Anansi put the basket down.

He went to shelter from the rain.

The rain caused flooding, so Anansi hid in a hole.

Vulture saw the basket and covered it with his wings.

“This basket is mine,” said Vulture.
 
"It is mine!" shouted Anansi.

Vulture said, "I found money and maize unprotected."

The chief and his elders took time to decide who was right.

Finally, they said, "Vulture is right. The basket is his."

Rabbit returned to his farm.

Anansi had no money, or friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a long dry spell. The animals ate all the grass in the country. 

Only the imbowa plants on the big trees survived.

One day, Goat saw Hyena pass by with a knife. 

Goat asked for the knife so that she could cut imbowa plants to eat.

Hyena gave the knife to Goat. She cut down the climbing plant, and ate until she was full. 

Goat forgot all about the knife she had used.

When Hyena returned to ask for the knife, Goat was at a loss. 

She could not remember where she had dropped it.

Goat scratched here and there in search of the knife. 

Up to today Goat is still looking for that knife.

Hyena told Goat, "Since you have lost my knife, which was the source of my livelihood, I will eat you. Then I will eat your offspring!"

From that time, Hyena has never spared Goat.

Meanwhile, Goat continues to search for Hyena's knife.

------------------------------------------------------------



Hyena and Raven were once great friends, even though they were quite different in some ways. 

Raven could fly but Hyena was only able to walk.

One day Hyena, curious to know something about his friend, asked Raven, "What is this white thing which is always below your neck?"

Raven answered, "It is the fatty meat which I usually eat in the sky. I have been eating it for so long now it is stuck on my neck."

On hearing about meat, saliva started pouring out of Hyena's mouth for he was greedy and he loved meat very much. 

Hyena really wanted to eat that meat. But how could he reach the meat in the sky if he had no wings to fly? 

He asked Raven, "Please my friend, lend me some feathers so that I can make myself some wings. I really want to be able to fly like you."

Raven was not mean, so he gave him some feathers. Hyena sewed them together into wings. He fastened them to his body, and tried to take off into the sky. 

But he was far too heavy for the few feathers to carry him. So he had to think of another plan.

Hyena asked Raven, "Please my friend, could I hold onto your tail as you fly up into the sky?" 

"All right," said Raven. "I know how much you want to fly. Let's do it tomorrow morning." 

When day came, Hyena took hold of Raven's tail and Raven flew up into the sky.

Raven flew and flew and flew until he was exhausted. 

But Hyena said, "Just a little further, my friend!" 

He could see the white and fatty meat just above them, and his mouth was watering.

When they reached the first piece of fatty meat, Hyena felt a jerk. One of Raven's tail feathers came off in his hand!

Then there was another jerk, and another. Raven felt much lighter, and the ache in his tail was going.

Raven sang: Raven's feathers, unpluck yourselves. Raven's feathers, unpluck yourselves. 

In response, Hyena sang the opposite: Raven's feathers hold on, don't unpluck yourselves. Raven's feathers hold on, don't unpluck yourselves.

Finally, the feathers could not hold Hyena anymore. He was in the middle of nowhere in the sky. 

He jumped onto the fatty meat thinking that as he ate, the fatty meat would hold him. 

But as he tried to hold and eat the 'meat', all he felt was moist cloud!

By now he was falling fast. "Help, help!" he shouted. But no one could hear him. 

Raven was lost in the clouds.

Hyena fell on the ground with a crash and lay silent for some minutes. 

He woke up howling in pain, with a broken leg and dark scars all over his body.

From that day to now, Hyena limps and he has many scars on his body. He has never been able to fly. 

He and Raven are no longer friends.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mallam has a cat called Minos. 

Minos lives in the house with her two children.

Mallam also has a dog. His name is Danger. 

Danger lives in the house too.

Minos and Danger sometimes eat together.

There are many lizards in the house. Minos loves eating them. Danger loves chasing them. 

Sometimes Danger helps Minos to catch lizards.

One night, a thief came into the house. He put things in a cloth and tied it.

Danger barked fiercely. The thief threatened him with a big stick.

Minos and her son named Manny heard Danger barking. 

They woke up and went to see why he was barking.

The thief saw the cats coming. He was afraid of cats! 

He dropped the stick and the things he had stolen, and ran.

In the morning, Mallam and the family saw the items the thief dropped. 

They we happy that the cats and the dog live in the house.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Msema's father came home with a she goat.

He was given the goat at the farmers' club.

Msema had a bad habit of littering plastics.

His parents told him not to litter.

If swallowed, plastic can kill an animal.

Msema did not listen to his parents' advice. 

The goat ate everything.

One day, she swallowed a plastic bag.

The plastic bag blocked her intestines.

The goat's belly started to swell.

She was very sick.

The agriculture advisor came to take the goat away for treatment.

Msema had to wait for five days. 

He swept all around his house.

He picked up all the litter and packed it into bags.

The goat came back in good health!

Msema was relieved and excited to see her again.

Later that year, the goat gave birth to two kids.

Msema looked after the goats very well.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, Chameleon challenged Rabbit to a race to see who was faster.

Rabbit accepted and said, "You are so slow! You start with one foot, then stop and start with the other." 

He boasted, "I'm going to leave you far behind. You'll never catch me!"

They invited all the animals to come and watch the race.

Chameleon and Rabbit lined up and waited for the signal.

As the race began, Chameleon jumped onto Rabbit's tail.

The animals laughed and laughed.

Rabbit did not realise that Chameleon was on his tail.

Hearing the noise, Rabbit skidded to a stop. Chameleon jumped off Rabbit's tail.

"Hey, watch where you're going! It's about time you got here," Chameleon shouted at Rabbit.

Rabbit was amazed. He started running again.

He did not know that Chameleon had once again jumped onto his tail.

As Rabbit approached the finish line, the animals saw that Chameleon was still on Rabbit's tail. They clapped and laughed.

Rabbit heard the noise and thought that Chameleon had already arrived ahead of him.

When they arrived at the finish line, Chameleon jumped off Rabbit's tail. 

"Don't step on me! I got here first!" Chameleon shouted at Rabbit.

Rabbit stormed off in a rage. 

Chameleon stayed to receive the prize, and Rabbit lost.

------------------------------------------------------------



Dedo was a young woman in Ogorme village. She was different to other women. 

She dressed in torn, dirty clothes. She wore the left slipper on the right foot and the right slipper on the left foot.

Dedo did not talk to anyone in the village. She also did not work with anybody. She would talk to herself, jump and clap her hands.

Sometimes Dedo picked up food from the ground and ate it.  

She had never fallen sick, despite eating from the ground. Nobody in the village had given her medicine, nor taken her to the hospital to be cured of any sickness.

Some people of Ogorme village saw Dedo as mad. Others said she was a witch.  

They insulted her. They asked her not to fetch water from where Ogorme people fetched their drinking water.

Then came the farming season. Dedo had a hoe, a cutlass and a dirty bucket.  

She used the hoe and cutlass to weed the land. She used the bucket to fetch water for use on the farm.

Dedo planted maize and groundnuts. She worked on her farm every day.

The people of Ogorme stood by, watched and laughed at her. She did not mind them and took care of her crops.

Any time she worked on the farm, she would sing, "Laziness kills! Don't be lazy. You will go hungry."

As Dedo sang, she clapped, jumped and danced.

Three months later, Dedo's crops bore many fruits.

It was time for harvesting. The husks of the maize looked green and fresh. The silk was brown in colour.

The people of Ogorme now went to Dedo to beg for maize and groundnuts. 

Even though she freely gave them food, some wicked people went to steal when she was not at the farm.

One day, a stranger visited Ogorme village. He saw Dedo on her farm. He was very happy to see the work she had done.  

The stranger greeted her, "Ayekoo!" But Dedo did not answer.

The stranger did not understand Dedo. He went to the village to find out more about her.

Some of the people of Ogorme village told him that Dedo was mad.

Looking at Dedo's hard work and the farm, the stranger asked himself, "Is Dedo really mad?" 

He said out loud, "Well then, I have never seen a mad woman like her in all my life!"

------------------------------------------------------------



I love to play soccer. 

I love to play soccer with Thando, Nhlanhla and Ben.

This is my mum.

I love my mum. 

She makes me laugh.

I love God, because God created me.

I love school, because the teachers teach me what I need to know.

I love to play with dogs, because it is fun.

I love birthdays, because I like to celebrate.

And I love myself because …

… because … I do!

------------------------------------------------------------



One night Grandpa was tucking me in. 

His hands were soft and his hair was thin.

"I'm going to tell you a special story, about a girl named Lory Dory."

You couldn't see Lory Dory at all because she was born invisible.

You'd only see Lory when rain hit her head.

Or when she was curled under blankets in bed.

Lory was left out of all the kids' games. 

They teased her and they called her names.

"Look, it's Lory. The Imaginary Friend! She's not like us,  she just pretends!"

One day at school, a boy wanted to know: "How do you look? I only see you in snow."

"Can you paint yourself?" 

Lory knew that she could. But not in the same way the boy thought she would.

Lory painted her body with all that she loved from the world all around and the sky up above.

She painted herself every day with such pride, to bring out the person who she was inside.

"I know I'm invisible and hard to see. So I painted these pictures to show the real me."

"Are you making this up, Gramps? Is this story true?" 

"Lory is real – real as me, real as you."

When Grandpa had left me, I can't quite be sure, but I think I saw Lory just outside my door.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago,  there was a man called Kato. He lived in Kabuusu town. He stayed with his dog in a small house.

One day Kato was very sick. He had no one to help him. When he recovered,  he decided he would marry a woman who lived nearby.

He invited friends and relatives to attend the marriage ceremony. Kato was very excited because he thought he was getting a helper.

Many things were brought for the bride and her groom. These were baskets of millet,  mats,  bananas,  groundnuts,  and other gifts for the home.

The wedding function ended and all the visitors left for their homes. Kato was ready to start a new life with his wife and the dog.

The next day,  Kato served sweet banana to his wife,  but she refused to eat.

When Kato went out to hunt,  the woman ate all the sweet bananas.

Kato came back from hunting and he was hungry. He asked for sweet bananas. His wife said that the dog had eaten them all!

The following day,  Kato went to his farm. When he came home,  he found that his wife had eaten all the meat. She did not even share with the dog.

Another day,  Kato went to visit his friend and when he came back,  the woman had eaten all the groundnuts. The basket was completely empty. Kato was annoyed with his new wife.

Kato thought,  "Something is wrong with this woman." He decided to apply magic. He put milk in a magic pot,  put the pot under the bed,  and went out hunting.

The woman saw the pot,  and that it was full of milk. At once,  she picked up the pot and put it to her mouth. She drank all the milk while the dog watched her.

Unfortunately,  the pot got stuck to her mouth. She tried to remove the pot but all in vain. She shouted,  and jumped up and down. But the pot stayed stuck. The dog watched all this.

Then the dog ran off to find Kato. The dog barked and barked,  and jumped up and down. Kato realised that something was wrong at home.

They ran home together. Kato was very surprised to find his wife with a pot stuck to her mouth. He looked at her and wondered.

Kato touched his wife's cheek and the pot dropped down at once. The woman was very ashamed. She decided to go back to her parents' home.

------------------------------------------------------------



Ariana was born in America. Her mother is from Kenya.

When Ariana visits Kenya, what things will she see?

On the road, she will see sheep.

She will also see motorbike taxis called 'boda boda' and tuktuks.

She will see her Kenyan relatives.

Her relatives will prepare a big celebration.

Ariana will celebrate and be happy with them.

Ariana will play with other children.

If she goes to the market, she will see many different things.

She will also see people dressed differently.

She will eat many fruit.

She will eat oranges, bananas and pineapples.

Ariana will try to climb tall trees.

She has never done that in America.

She will see farms with different crops.

Many Kenyans are farmers.

She will visit animal parks.

There, she will see lions, elephants, buffaloes, giraffes, warthogs, antelopes and zebras.

She will see domestic animals like chicken, cats, goats and doves.

In her home in America, she has two cats.

She might witness a village wedding.

She will see people singing and dancing in a traditional way.

She will visit the Kenyan coast.

There, she will swim in the Indian Ocean.

On Sundays, Ariana will join her relatives and go to church.

Many Christians in Kenya attend Church Service on Sunday.

Ariana will be so happy with her visit to Kenya.

She might share some of her experiences with her friends in America.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Cat.

This is Dog.

It is night. It is dark. 

It is cold. It is very cold.

For Dog it is too cold.

Cat gives Dog underwear.

One pair of underwear is dirty. One pair of underwear is clean.

Dog takes the clean underwear. But it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog shirts.

One shirt is big. One shirt is small.

Dog takes the big shirt. But it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog trousers. 

One pair of trousers is long. One pair of trousers is short.

Dog takes the long pair of trousers. But it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog vests. One vest is wet, one vest is dry. 

Dog takes the dry vest, but it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog jackets. One jacket is thick, one jacket is thin. 

Dog takes the thick jacket, but it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog hats. One hat is high, one hat is low.

Dog takes the high hat, but it is still too cold.

Cat gives Dog shoes.

One pair of shoes is new, one pair of shoes is old.

Dog takes the new shoes, and then... 

It is not too cold for Dog.

The night is over. 

The moon goes. The sun comes.

It is day. It is light. It is warm. It is very warm.

For Dog it is too warm.

Bye bye Cat.

Bye bye hot Dog.



------------------------------------------------------------



Esuuk, the Zebra loved solving problems. 

One day, Ataisi the Elephant said, "Esuuk, crossing the river is too hard for me! I don't want to cross it anymore."

Zuri had a great idea. 

"Let's design a bridge!"

She gathered her friends: Fubi the Tortoise, Boma the Baboon, and Firi the Frog.

"First, we need to plan!" Esuuk said.

Esuuk asked, "What kind of bridge do we need?"

Ataisi replied, "It must be strong!"

Firi added, "It should not be slippery."

Esuuk drew a picture of the bridge. "Does this work?" She asked.

"It's a good start, but add handrails," said Fubi.

They used sticks, leaves, and mud to build the bridge. 

Boma tested it first. "It is strong, but it's bumpy!"

Esuuk smoothed the path, and Ataisi tried it next. 

"This is perfect!" He said, crossing happily.

"We did it!" Esuuk cheered. 

"Solving problems is about asking, testing, and fixing. Together we can fix anything."

------------------------------------------------------------



Feet

Legs

Knees

Waist

Belly

Chest

Hands

Arms

Elbows

Head

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a girl named Isabella. Isabella's family was a nuclear family which is made up of her father, mother, and three siblings.

Ezenwa, Akorhre, and the youngest, which is her baby brother.

Isabella smiled as she watched her baby brother sleeping peacefully in his baby cot.

"As the oldest sibling, I must teach Azenwa, Akorhre, and my baby brother how to do things right," Isabella said to herself.

Isabella helped her mother to make food for her baby brother when he cried.

Azenwa built tall towers with building blocks.

This made their baby brother so happy and he clapped his hands.

Akorhre sang funny songs.

They made their baby brother stop crying every time.

Isabella's mother taught her how to care for her baby brother when it was her turn to hold him.

She showed her how to gently support his head.

On Sunday, the whole family dressed in their beautiful clothes and went to church.

Isabella was proud watching her parents and siblings all sitting together, knowing this was her perfect family. "I love my family," she said.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time there was a hyena and a monkey.

The hyena and the monkey had an argument. They went to a judge to settle their differences.

After the judge listened to their case he was afraid to pass judgement on their case.

He thought to himself, "If I condemn the hyena, it will eat all my cattle. And if I condemn the monkey, he will eat all my corn! So, what am I to do?"

The judge thought for a while, and said, "The case is too difficult for me to judge alone. You should go to the elders of the village." 

So the hyena and monkey went to the elders.

They told the elders about their disagreement.

After the elders listened to their case, they were also afraid to pass judgement.

If they supported the monkey, the hyena might eat their cattle. If they supported the hyena, the monkey might eat their corn. The elders told Hyena and Monkey that their case was very difficult.

Suddenly, the elders remembered a poor woman in the town. She had nothing to lose, neither cattle nor corn. 

"She can pass the judgement without any fear," said the elders to one another. They told the two animals to go to her.

They arrived at the poor woman’s house and asked her to give them judgement. She agreed.

But, she told them to speak to her separately, one by one.

First the poor woman called Hyena and said, "You are respected, a big animal, and a hero. How could you quarrel with this small and miserable monkey?"

The poor woman said to Hyena, "If people heard about this disagreement, they would look down on you. Stop the quarrel with Monkey."

"Of course you are right,” said Hyena. “I will drop this case. I will end the argument."

Then the poor woman called the monkey and she said, "You are smart and pretty. Why do you argue with this dirty, smelly animal who eats rotten things? What will people think of you when they hear about your argument with this ugly creature?"

After a while Monkey said, "You are right! I will drop this case."

After that, the poor woman called both of them and said, "You both agreed to drop this case. So, you should forgive each other."

Both animals apologised to each other and settled their dispute. 

When people from the town heard this story, they were surprised. The poor woman solved the problem that the judge and the elders failed to solve.

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived a rich man named Denen.

He had two dogs named Pulugh and Ruam.

Pulugh and Ruam were the most faithful dogs ever known. These dogs protected their master's house from burglars.

This made Denen very happy with them.

Denen loved his dogs because of their good behaviour.

He always gave them treats, bones, chicken, beef and canned dog food.

Denen lived in a big and beautiful house in Makurdi. 

Pulugh and Ruam made Denen and his neighbours feel safe.

On day, when Denen was at work, a thief sneaked into the house. The dogs barked frantically. The neighbours went to check. 

There was a stranger wearing a hood. They could only see his eye balls.

Some neighbours blocked the outlets. The thief could not run anywhere! 

Others called the police who acted swiftly and arrested the thief.

Denen's neighbors recounted the events that took place during his absence.

He expressed his gratitude by giving them gifts.

Denen hugged and petted his dogs.

He gave them treats that made them very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Sinyaire village was surrounded by hills. Many snakes lived in the forest on those hills. 

The biggest snake was called Unyalego by the villagers. Unyalego scared many people. It swallowed whole goats and sheep.

One day, three sisters, Apiyo, Ajoh and Atieno went to the forest to fetch firewood. 

Grandmother warned, "Beware of Unyalego the big snake. Do not take anything from the forest except the wood." 

Only Ajoh did not pay attention.

The girls packed milk, bananas, sweet potatoes and water. 

They took ropes for tying firewood and a sharp machete for chopping the wood. 

Then they left for the forest.

On the way, the sisters chatted and laughed. 

Suddenly, Apiyo, the eldest of them, said, "Be quiet. We are coming to where Unyalego the snake lives."

Atieno called to the others, "Look, here are Unyalego's golden teeth. Let us take them." 

Apiyo reminded them, "Don't forget grandmother's warning. We must not take anything from the forest except firewood."

Ajoh said, "I don't trust grandmother. She said that to stop us having what we want. I want the golden teeth." 

Her sisters were worried, but Ajoh did not care.

At that moment Unyalego came looking for his golden teeth. He was furious when he could not find the teeth. 

Then Unyalego heard the girls chatting and laughing. He hid under a rock next to the road where the girls would pass on their way back.

The sisters were going home carrying their firewood. Suddenly, they heard, "Hssssss!" 

There was Unyalego with his mouth wide open, ready to bite. The girls were terrified.

Unyalego asked the girls, "Who took my golden teeth?" No one answered. 

Unyalego decided to test the girls. "Whoever is innocent, will be able to sing well. She will go home with her wood. But the guilty one will sing badly. And I will eat her!"

Apiyo started to sing with a clear voice:

It was not me, it was not me,
who took the teeth, 
The one who took is still behind. 

Then Atieno sang the song. She also sang well.

Lastly, it was Ajoh's turn. She was scared. She started singing. It  sounded terrible and the words were wrong. 

Unyalego shouted, "Can't you sing properly like the others?" Unyalego knew that Ajoh took his golden teeth.

Unyalego opened his huge jaws and swallowed Ajoh. Her sisters ran back to the village. They told everyone the story of what happened. 

"I warned her, if only she had listened," the girls' grandmother said sadly.

------------------------------------------------------------



Parna was a tall, slender boy who was in Grade 3. 

He liked to wear the long black coat that his Uncle Teteyo gave him.

During holiday time, Parna looked after his parents' cows.

One day, as Parna looked after the cows, it suddenly started raining.

Just at that time, his father's favourite cow, Blackie, gave birth. 

The calf was the most beautiful calf Parna had ever seen.

Parna was so happy caring for Blackie and the calf that he forgot about the rest of the cows.

He thought, "Father promised to give the calf to me if it is female."

As he daydreamed, a strong hand pulled him up. 

Parna saw Uncle Teteyo and remembered, "Uncle, where are the cows?"

Uncle Teteyo replied, "Your mother found all the cows in the shed, except Blackie, and you. 

She was afraid so she sent me to fetch you."

Parna excitedly told his uncle how Blackie gave birth to the beautiful calf. 

Uncle Teteyo said, "I'll carry the calf as you and Blackie follow."

Everyone was happy to see Parna, Blackie and the calf safe.

Parna asked his father, "Will you let me have the calf as you promised?"

"Yes, my son, she is all yours. A promise is a promise."

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, in a small village, there lived a boy named Lunga. He loved animals, especially, cats and had a special spot in his heart for the furry creatures. 

Lunga spent his time caring for and playing with cats. His face lit up when he saw them chasing butterflies.

One day, Lunga decided to start a cat rescue in his village.

Without permission from his parents, he turned the backroom into a temporary shelter for stray cats. 

He devoted his time to caring for, feeding, grooming, and finding them proper homes.

"The Black Panther," as he would call it, was his favorite amongst the other cats. The Black Panther preferred red meat, whereas the other cats enjoyed milk.

Lunga loved watching him while eating until he was done. Panther was the apple of his eye.

One time, when it was time to feed Black Panther, panic set in. Lunga realized that the cat was nowhere to be found. 

"Panther! Panther!" Lunga called out in distress, devastation written all over his face. Desperate for help, he contacted SPCA.

Lunga's love for cats deepened after Panther went missing. The incident was an eye-opener for him.

He remained committed to working with animals, inspired by his dream to run his sanctuary. "You can't crush my dreams like that," Lunga said.

Lunga loved reading stories. Every evening, he would snuggle on his favorite couch with his cats and read them tales that lulled them into deep sleep.

He enjoyed the quiet moments. "You are such good listeners, guys," said Lunga with excitement.

After years of dedication to rescuing cats, Lunga's efforts sparked the interest of the community. He started matching cats with adoptive families, giving his furry friends a chance at happiness. 

His story touched King Sihhenge of Mgobodzi village.

Lunga's bravery and passion earned him recognition in the royal house. He was given an award for being a hero.

His mother was filled with pride. He became a role model to young kids in his village. With his dream realized, Lunga beamed with joy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Graça was about to be born in a small village in Mozambique. The country was poor and the people did not yet rule themselves.

Children didn't have good schools and many couldn't read. Graça's mother dreamed of giving her children better opportunities. But without education there was little hope.

Baby Graça would be the sixth child. But with this joyous event there was great sadness. Their beloved father was dying. He dreamed that his youngest daughter would go to a good school.

He knew that education would give her opportunities he never had. His family promised to make their dad's dream come true.

Just weeks after their dad died, the new baby was born. She was given a name to match the beauty and blessing that she was – Graça.

As the years passed, Graça brought much joy to her family and they kept the promise made to their father. Graça would have a good education.

Graça worked hard at school and as a teenager she received a gift that would change her life. It was a scholarship to attend a rich city school.

She dreamed of becoming a teacher and using her education to educate others. She wanted the children of her beloved Mozambique to know reading and learning. She dreamed of a time when all children would go to school.

Graça did her best in that city school and years later she was blessed again. It was another scholarship to attend a university in faraway Portugal.

She met new friends, learned new languages and read a bounty of books. She realised her dream of becoming a teacher.

All this made Graça very happy. There was only one thing that still made her sad.

Back at home people were still not free. But now Graça had an education, skills, and hope. She also had friends who felt as she did about children's right to learn.

She would use her knowledge and work with her friends. Together they would bring change to Mozambique.

Finally with the help of all her friends, Mozambique was free!

The man chosen to lead the country was Graça's friend,  Samora Machel.

They fell in love and got married.

Graça was given the important job of making sure that all children in Mozambique got a good education. It was a hard job because there were so many children in Mozambique who couldn't read.

She knew that they needed education and wanted to make real change in her country. She started with primary schools and getting boys and girls into classrooms. Literacy was her focus and putting books into children's hands.

Graça and Samora had two children. They shared a dream to create good lives for their own family and for the Mozambican people.

They were happy and hopeful. Then one terrible day, Samora died in an aeroplane crash.

Graça mourned Samora for many years, but she found love again. She met a man who had also spent his life dreaming of bringing freedom, hope and education to his people.

Graça married Nelson Mandela and together they worked to help Africa's children.



------------------------------------------------------------



Ada is chuckling because she heard a funny story.

She is smiling.

What is Ada feeling?

Gisa is feeling grumpy. 

He has a scowl on his face.

Why is he irritated?

Yuadoo is scared of the dark.

Everyone feels fear sometimes. 

But Yuadoo can ask for help.

Chidubem is worried about his school work. 

He can tell his teacher.

He can ask for help.

Lushan is playing around!

It's okay to be silly sometimes.

Eruro is feeling sad. 

It's okay to cry.

Emotions come and go.

Ayator is bursting with happiness.

He is joyful.

Emotions come and go.

Hadiza is bored.

She needs to find something to do.

Ayo is angry.

He is frustrated.

Anger is a difficult feeling.

Labake is excited. 

What's the cause of her excitement?

Mother made her favourite food.

Zege felt sleepy.

He was very tired.

"But wait, is 'sleepy' an emotion?" asks Efe.

Efe is confused!
 
Can you answer his question?

Tega is feeling surprise and shock.

He heard some gossip.

Is it true?

Yebo is sick.

She feels miserable.

She needs some medicine and rest to feel better.

Sekyen is feeling content.

She has finished her chores.

Now she can play.

Vandefan does not have chores today.

He shows two thumbs up to Sekyen.

"Good job, now let's play!" he says.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a rich man who had two sons.

The rich man wrote in his will that the first son should get all his cows. And only one rooster should go to his second son.

So, after the man died, his first son got all the cows.

The second son was only given one rooster.

After some time, the rich son became sick. He went to the healer to ask what he should do to get better. 

The healer said, "You should slaughter a rooster of a special colour."

The rich son did not know where to get the rooster of the special colour.

Then he remembered his brother's rooster. He sent some people to his brother.

The brother said to them, "All that I have is this rooster. But if it can make my brother better, I would rather lose the rooster."

He generously gave the rooster.

The people slaughtered it and fed it to the sick brother. 

The brother recovered from his sickness.

After some time a most unusual thing happened.

The rich brother's body began growing feathers.

He could not believe his eyes.

The elders said, "This is the result of being unfair to your brother. You took all the cows, and the rooster that your father left him."

The elders told the rich brother, "To get well, your brother must forgive you."

The elders continued, "We will take this bracelet as a sign of forgiveness and give it to your brother. If he spits on it, you'll be cured."

The elders took the bracelet to the brother and said, "Spit on it and forgive your brother."

The brother spat on it.

As a result, the elders decided to give the poor brother half of the rich brother's cows.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a girl named Abla. She prayed to Allah to prevent her period from coming because she knew she would have to get married. 

Abla didn't want to get married. In fact, she liked reading her brother's school notes a lot!

When her period came, she cried and tried to hide it from her father. But her father found out. He was happy because there was a rich man who wanted to marry Abla. 

"Please don't send me to my husband's house at such a young age," begged Abla. But her father did not agree.

He asked her what she wanted to do instead of marriage. She told him she wanted to go to school like her brother Ibrahim. Her father laughed at her.

"Why do you want to go to school?" he asked her.

"Baba, I like reading Ibra's notes and I'm sure I'll do well if you allow me join school too."

"Of what use is education to you?" he asked her.

"Why does Ibrahim go to school then?"

"He is a man!"

"Baba, am I not your child too?"

"Ableluwa, you are my daughter. Alhaji Musa is a very rich man! He'll give you everything you need."

"Baba I don't want his money! I want to go to school!"

"You will marry him before your next period," her father said and walked out.

That afternoon, on her way to the market, Abla read a pamphlet from a Non-Governmental Organization that encouraged girls to go to school. 

Luckily for her, their address was near the market, so she went there and told them everything. They took an interest in her case and got her a lawyer who threatened to charge her father in court if he didn't allow her to go to school.

 The lawyer also made sure that she wasn't forced into marriage.

Abla was able to go to school where she was top of her class. She got scholarships to study Law at university. 

Her father was very proud of her and remorseful for almost preventing her destiny.

Today, Abla is a Human Rights activist who helps young girls in the same situation that she was in. 

She wants every girl to know that she is just as important as any boy. We are all equal!

------------------------------------------------------------



Abebe was in his first year of school. His father was a farmer. One year, Abebe's father planted teff in his field. 

Every day after school, Abebe went to the field to help his father.

Next to the teff field was a football field. One afternoon while Abebe was chasing birds, four English boys came to play soccer.

The boys began to play. The ball bounced up and landed in the teff field.

The ball damaged some teff. One of the boys ran into the field to get the ball, and he damaged more teff!

They continued to play. The ball bounced and landed on the crop again and again.

The boys kept running into the field to fetch the ball. Each time they damaged some of the teff.

Abebe and his father became more and more angry about the destruction of their crop.

Neither Abebe nor his father could speak English. They didn't know how to say to the boys, "Don't come into this field. Stop damaging our crops!"

The English boys didn't know any other language except English.

Abebe's father said, "Son, use what you have learned in school. Tell them to stop kicking the ball into our field!"

At that time, Abebe had only learned the English letters A, B, C, D, E, F.

Abebe wanted to shout at the boys. But he did not know the words in English.

The ball came bouncing into the teff field again. One of the boys came running after the ball, into the field.

Abebe ran towards the boy, waving his arms. He started shouting. He shouted as loudly and clearly as he could, "A, B, C, D, E, F!" 

He shouted three times, "A, B, C, D, E, F!"

The English boy stopped running through the teff. His friends in the soccer field also stood still and watched Abebe. 

Then they spoke to each other in English and began to smile. They understood what Abebe was communicating.

The boy with the ball walked carefully through the teff.

Then the four English boys went to play away from the teff field.

Abebe's father was surprised. He believed that his son had spoken English.

He said, "Oh, my son, you're a brave and clever boy!" He was proud of his son.

Abebe was also surprised and pleased. He did not know what to say.

Abebe's father encouraged him to work hard at school, and after school.

Abebe studied three languages and knew them very well. He became a successful translator and writer.

------------------------------------------------------------



Aruta was an orphan living with her aunt. The aunt was a wicked woman.

She sent Aruta to hawk items when other children went to school.

Aruta also did all the house chores.

She had no time to play. Aruta had no friends.

One day, Aruta went to fetch water in the river.

She saw a shinny golden ring in the water. She picked it up.

Aruta handed over the ring to the herder who brought his cattle to drink. "Here is your ring, sir. I found it in the water," Aruta said.

The herder returned the ring to Aruta. "Take it. It's yours."

"No, my aunt will say I stole it from someone," Aruta declined.

"It's a gift from a good spirit. Anytime you need things done, command it," the herder said.

Aruta returned home with the ring. Before her aunt would wake up she would command the ring to do all the chores.

The compound would be swept, the dirty plates washed and the pot full.

The wicked aunt would see the hawking tray without wares but full of money.

She did not know what to ask Aruta to do next.

Aruta was now a happy girl.

She could rest, play and go to school just like many children in her village.

------------------------------------------------------------



Petros was an only child.

He was a clever student.

One day, Petros went off to play with his friends.

He saw a little dog stuck. 

"I will help you," said Petros.

The dog barked.

He danced and licked Petros with joy.

Petros' friends chased the dog. 

"Stop! Stop!" Petros shouted.

The dog ran away. 

He hid from the bad boys.

The friends found Petros crying. 

They said, "Let's find your dog."

Petros had no hope. 

His friends said, "We will find him."

They looked everywhere. 

Petros said, "He must be at the river."

The dog was afraid of the boys. 

Petros called, "Don't jump!"

The dog ran to Petros.

They were happy to be together.

The friends said, "We are sorry. He will be our friend too."

------------------------------------------------------------



This is the story of Keeper and his nursery for orphaned animals.

August was a busy month for Keeper and his helpers at the nursery.

One year old Mkite arrived first. 

She came in an old green truck.

Keeper and his helpers were very sorry for Mkite. 

She was so thin and sad.

But soon, Mkite got stronger. 

She began to play with the other animals at the nursery.

On another day in August, a helicopter landed at the nursery.

Keeper and his helpers rushed outside. 

In the helicopter was a small elephant covered with a blanket.

It was Ndiwa. He was five days' old. 

Keeper fed Ndiwa with a bottle.

The third orphan that month was Malea. 

She arrived at the nursery on a red tractor. She was six months' old.

Malea the rhinoceros soon became close friends with Enkare, a baby buffalo. 

They went everywhere together.

One night, everybody was woken up by the arrival of Ambia.

Ambia was five months old. 

She was weak after her long journey.

Because of her long neck, Keeper held the bottle high to feed Ambia.

Tiny twins, Abei and Moit, arrived in the middle of August. 

These antelopes were only a few hours old. They were very sick.

Everyone was sad when Abei died a week after he arrived at the nursery. 

But Keeper and his helpers saved Moit.

The last orphans to arrive in August were Kopi, Kepi and Keji. 

These cubs were two weeks old. They were very hungry when they arrived.

Keeper and his helpers love all of the animals, even the naughty ones.

The naughtiest baby was Lobolia. 

Lobolia liked to hide Keeper's glasses.

The people at the nursery work hard to look after the baby animals. 

They hope that one day the orphans can look after themselves. Then they can return to the wild.

How old and how many? Read the story again and then answer these questions. 1. How many animals arrived at the nursery in the month of August? 2. Who arrived first that month? 3. How old was this animal? 4. Who arrived last? How old were these animals? 5. Who were the youngest animals to arrive in August? 6. How old were they? 7. Who was the oldest animal to arrive in August?

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandmother's house is near a baobab tree.

The tree is tall, with a trunk almost as big as Grandmother's hut.

"When I was born 80 years ago, this tree was already as big as it is," Grandmother often said.

This made me curious. "How can a tree live that long?" I always wondered.

One day, a botanist came to our school.

I was excited and asked many questions.

"How long can a baobab tree live?" I started.

"Baobabs can live for over 4,000 years," said the botanist.

"Wow!" All the students expressed surprise.

"Is it true that they store water?" I asked again.

"Yes, they can store up to 120,000 litres of water," replied the botanist.

"Ooooh! Nooo! That is over 6000 buckets," I shouted.

I recalled Grandmother saying that during droughts, baobab trees supplied them with water.

"But how did they do this as if baobabs have taps?" Luso wondered.

"Is it true that the gods planted it upside down to teach it manners?" I asked again.

"No, but there are a lot of myths about baobab trees. That is one of them," said the botanist.

It is known by many names. Some call it bottle tree, the tree of life, upside-down tree or monkey bread tree.

All these names tell a story about how communities look at the baobab tree.

The Baobab is viewed as a symbol of resilience in many communities.

This is because it survives droughts and bushfires and lives long.

When I got home, I stared at the baobab tree.

I caressed the bark as if it were a child.

"You are a symbol of resilience," I told the tree.

------------------------------------------------------------















------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a royal couple who ruled over their people with love. 

Queen Sara and king Ade had everything they wanted. Except a child. 

Queen Sara yearned to be a mother, but the royal couple remained childless.

One day, the queen mother suggested that a change of scenery might be good for her daughter-in-law. 

King Ade agreed and begged his wife to go for a vacation in Odufe, her father's hometown.

So, queen Sara travelled to Odufe, to stay with her parents. 

They were delighted to see her, and tried to make her forget about her sorrow.

Queen Sara was walking in the forest one morning when she came across a girl. 

The queen was impressed by the child's good manners. "What is your name and why are you in the forest alone?" she asked. 

"My name is Asa," said the girl.

"And my parents are dead," she added. 

The queen asked, "Who looks after you?" Asa replied, "My aunt, but she doesn't care about me."

There and then, queen Sara decided that she wanted to adopt Asa. The little angel needed love!

Asa's aunt was relieved to get rid of her. She was barely thirty and didn't like to be tied down. 

She was pleased that the girl found someone to love her. 

Asa was a good child but her aunt just wasn't ready for the stress of motherhood!

Queen Sarah took Asa back to the royal palace, where king Ade welcomed them with joy and love.

There were great celebrations at the palace.

And happiest of all were princess Asa and queen Sara!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, King Lion called all the animals for a big meeting. 

He wanted to discuss how they could protect their environment.

As the animals arrived in large numbers, King Lion told them to keep quiet.

When everyone was gathered, King Lion said, "My people, listen carefully."

"Our enemies are cutting down our trees and burning our bushes. What are we going to do?" asked King Lion.

"Girls, boys, men and women, they are all ruining our environment. How can we stop them from destroying our homes?" asked King Lion again.

All the animals were sad and worried.

They voted for elephant, buffalo, rhinoceros, and eagle to find a solution to this problem.

These animals decided to arrest humans who were cutting down their trees.

And so they arrested charcoal burners and swamp drainers.

They arrested bush burners, and even some farmers.

Then the animals made a peaceful agreement with humans.

One part of the land would be for animals, and the other for humans. 

From that day, animals no longer worried about human actions.

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandmother began, "Hare and Elephant were neighbours and friends."

Hare liked mushrooms but he was too lazy to farm.

There were no mushrooms. 

Hare began to steal Elephant's bananas.

Elephant sang, "I will catch the thief!" 

Hare was afraid.

Monkey watched the farm but Hare did not steal.

Elephant went to check. 

Hare hid in the pumpkin leaves.

Elephant looked everywhere, but he did not find the thief.

Another day, Hare escaped inside a big pumpkin.

Elephant saw the big pumpkin and swallowed it.

The pumpkin moved in Elephant's stomach.

Elephant spat out the pumpkin. 

Hare ran away.

Grandmother said, "And that is the end of the story."

------------------------------------------------------------



Chanri and Boipelo are going on an adventure around South Africa. 

Their journey starts in Kimberley, in the Northern Cape. 

In Kimberley you will find the Big Hole!

Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Cape Town in the Western Cape. 

Chanri and Boipelo pick juicy grapes at the farms.

Tjoeke puff toot-toot, then they head off to Bhisho, in the Eastern Cape.

The two friends have fun at the Elephant Park!

Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they pass through the Free State. 

They admire all the pretty roses blooming in Bloemfontein.

On to Mahikeng, in the North West. 

The train slows down to meet Rina the rhino at the National Park. 

Then our friends speed on to Polokwane, in Limpopo.

Toot-toot toot-toot! They're running late, so the train doesn't stop in Johannesburg, Gauteng. 

From the train they see many cars and people in this busy city of gold.

Tjoeke puff toot-toot, they travel to Emalahleni, in Mpumalanga. 

They visit a big coal factory to get fuel for their train.

Chanri and Boipelo end their train journey in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal.

They share sweet bananas with their friends, and talk about their adventure around the country.

Do you remember the provinces and their cities?

------------------------------------------------------------



Coffee is a plant which produces berries with seeds inside. The seeds are coffee beans.

There are many legends about the discovery of coffee. One of them is the legend of Kaldi in Ethiopia.

Kaldi was a young Ethiopian shepherd.

One day Kaldi's goats ate red berries off the coffee plant and he noticed that they started jumping around.

Kaldi was eager to know whether the berries gave the goats energy. He chewed the fruit. The taste was extremely bitter!

After a while, Kaldi felt alert and full of energy.

He picked some of the coffee leaves and fruit, and took them home.

He offered the fruit to his wife.

His wife chewed the berries and felt the same effects that Kaldi had felt.

Kaldi and his wife thought that it was a gift from God.

Days later, Kaldi took some of the coffee leaves and fruit to a nearby monastery. 

Kaldi told the whole story about the goats and the berries to the monks.

When he left the monastery, two monks secretly followed Kaldi. They wanted to check whether what he had told them was true.

The monks saw that it was true. The goats ate the berries and were in a playful mood.

The monks returned to the monastery. They told the other monks to boil the coffee fruit. 

The monks drank the boiled fruit and found it tasted terribly bitter! They thought that it was a devil's drink.

They threw the remains of the fruit onto a fire. Suddenly, they could smell a nice aroma coming from the fire.

A noble idea of roasting, then boiling the seeds came to their minds.

The beverage brewed from the roasted coffee beans tasted much better than before. 

After the monks had drunk the beverage they felt alert and energetic.

Since then, people have drunk brewed coffee to stay awake, and also for enjoyment.

Coffee drinking started in Ethiopia and spread across the world!

------------------------------------------------------------



Fana and her family live in a busy town.

Fana has a cat, two hens, a goat and a dove.

One day, Fana saw other children throwing stones at doves.

Fana ran towards the children. 

She shouted, “Stop throwing stones.”

Fana took the two doves home to look after them.

She fed them and told her family how she saved them.

Fana and her parents took the doves to the clinic.

Fana tells her friends, “Animals are our friends. We protect them.”

------------------------------------------------------------



Nusha thought that she wasn't very good at anything.

But one day, Nusha found out that she could fly.

She flew up trees to pick coconuts.

She flew to school when she was late.

She flew along the beach on Saturdays.

She flew to her grandma's house on Sundays.

She flew to the market because it was quicker.

Everyone asked her how she did it.

But Nusha didn't know how she did it.

She just did.

One day she met a boy who could fly too.

They started to go out together.

Maybe one day they got married, and had children.

------------------------------------------------------------



Milo was a little monkey who was an orphan.

 Her parents were killed by a hunter.

One day, Milo was searching for fruits in the forest.

She came across Old Hyena hunting for food.

"Hey little monkey. Come to my house for dinner tonight," Old Hyena said.

Milo smiled and replied, "I will come if you allow me to  wear a black dress."

Old Hyena agreed.

Old Hyena's daughter cooked a delicious meal.

They all ate together, then went to sleep.

Milo exchanged her clothes with the ones that Old Hyena's daughter was wearing.

In the night, Old Hyena dragged the little girl wearing a black dress and roasted her in the fire.

In the morning, Old Hyena saw Milo wearing her daughter's spotted dress. She was angry for killing her own daughter.

Little Milo escaped.

She stayed on top of trees safe from hunters and hyenas.

------------------------------------------------------------



There was once a little girl named Dineo who stayed with her mother. Her biggest wish was to own a cell phone, but her mother was against it. 

Mother said that Dineo was underperforming and that having a cell phone would worsen her situation.

That bothered Dineo because she did not know how to overcome her situation. Every time it was her turn to read, she would get frustrated. 

Her performance in mathematics was also not good. Her teachers tried to assist her, but nothing seemed to work.

One day, Dineo went to play next to a dam. While she played, she saw an enormous fish staring at her, holding something in its fins. 

Dineo moved closer to the dam and saw that the giant fish was carrying a big cell phone. She was shocked.

"I know how badly you want a cell phone, Dineo," said the enormous fish.

"Yes, but mother does not want me to own one. She says that I am underperforming and owning one would worsen things," replied Dineo.

"Do not worry, you will own one and still pass your exams," said the fish.

The enormous fish showed Dineo some reading Apps with so many different English stories and how to use them.

It also showed her other Apps for different subjects, such as mathematics. He told Dineo to come every day after school to get help.

Dineo visited the enormous fish several times after school. She enjoyed browsing through reading apps on the phone and reading English stories of her choice.

Her reading skills improved a lot. Her performance in Mathematics also improved.

One day, out of curiosity, her mother followed Dineo to the dam. She could not believe her eyes when she heard Dineo reading fluently from the phone. 

"A cell phone is a good tool when used wisely, " said the enormous fish to Dineo's mother.

"Dineo, I am giving you this cell phone. Use it as a tool that will help you in your studies.

Use it wisely to fight your academic fights. You will be a winner," said the enormous fish.

After saying that, the enormous fish went back into the water slowly, with its eyes fixed on Dineo and her mother.

"During the storm, you were my rainbow fish," whispered Dineo.

------------------------------------------------------------



Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends.

One day they went on a journey in a taxi.

They reached the end of their journey.

The driver asked them to pay their fares.

Cow paid her fare.

Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.

The driver was about to give Dog his change.

Suddenly Goat ran away without paying.

The driver was very annoyed.

He drove away without giving Dog his change.

That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside.

He is looking for the driver who owes him change.

Goat runs away from the sound of a car.

She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.

Cow is not bothered by cars.

Cow takes her time crossing the road.

She knows she paid her fare in full.

------------------------------------------------------------



The living room

The dining room

The bedroom

The bathroom

The kitchen

The window

The door

The table

The chair

The garden

------------------------------------------------------------



There were four lambs living in a house with their mother. 

Mother was on her way to the market. "You will open the door only when I say open the door, my children," she warned her lambs.

Meanwhile, a fox was nearby and heard the mother. He went to the house and said, "My children, open the door." 
 
One of the lambs said, "No, that is not our mother's voice. Our mother's voice is soft." The fox was angry.

The fox wanted to make his voice like the lambs' mother. He decided to eat butter. 

He went to a shopkeeper. "Give me some butter, or I will kill you," threatened the fox. 

The shopkeeper gave him butter.

The fox went to the lambs and said, "My children, open the door." A lamb looked through the keyhole of the door and saw the black leg of the fox. 

"No, our mother's legs are red!" shouted the lamb. Fox was not successful.

Fox thought of another way. This time he planned to paint his legs with pepper powder. 

He went to a miller. "Give me pepper powder, or I will eat you," the fox threatened. 

The miller gave him pepper powder.

Fox painted his legs with the powder. He went to the lambs' house and said, "My children open the door." 

The lambs opened the door. Fox swallowed three of them.

The fourth lamb was hiding. 

Mother came back from the market. She said, "My children, I have come. Open the door."  

The fourth lamb was terrified and couldn't open the door for her mother.

When no one opened the door, the mother sheep kicked it open. She called her lambs. 

The fourth lamb came out of hiding. Her mother asked "Where are the others?"

Shivering, the lamb replied, "The fox swallowed the others!"

Her mother said, "The fox might eat us too. Let's move to another place." They set off to another place.

While they were travelling they saw the fox. He was sleeping. 

The mother approached the fox. She heard the voices of her lambs inside the fox's belly. 

"Bring me a razor blade, thread and a needle," said the mother to her lamb.

The mother cut the fox's belly with a razor blade. She found her three lambs inside his belly. 

She filled his belly with stones and stitched it together. She took all her lambs back to their house.

When the fox woke up, he found it very difficult to get up. 

He tried to drink water at a river, but he lost his balance. He fell into the water and drowned.

------------------------------------------------------------



Emaobong loved to play football as a little girl.

Now she is a coach.

When her team is discouraged, she speaks to each of them.

She even gives them new sport uniforms as often as possible.

She loves to encourage team members to be all they can ever be.

Manya and his father are in the market.

Manya plays football in Coach Emaobong's team.

But right now he needs uniforms for school.

While at the market, Manya see Coach Emaobong and is very excited.

Father reminds him to find the tailor.

Now they have found the tailor.

Manya will have new school uniforms as well as sport wears.

------------------------------------------------------------



I wake up and make fire.

I boil some water.

I chop the firewood.

I stir the pot.

I sweep the floor.

I wash the dishes.

Why do I work so hard?

When my brother is busy playing!

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a young girl called Hadija. She lived with her parents in Mambo village. Hadija's birthday was coming up, so she asked her parents for a birthday party.

Her mother said, "There will be no party. We have no money for it. You should go and play with your brothers."

Hadija was sad and soon, she was in tears. Her parents and her brothers tried to comfort her.

Hadija did not listen to them. She was angry and decided to run away from home.

Hadija ran into the big forest nearby. When she saw her parents following her, she climbed up a tall tree, all the way to the top.

She decided not to come down. "I will live on this big tree," she decided.

Hadija's parents desperately looked for her all around. When they located her, they begged her, "Hadija, please come down from the tree."

 Hadija was adamant. They eventually decided to leave her alone and return home.

As time passed, Hadija got lonely and bored but she was still angry with her parents.

Her friend, Aisha, came along. She asked her to climb down from the tree before it got dark.

Hadija climbed down from the tree and hugged her friend.

They began walking back home hand in hand. Aisha chatted Hadija up as they walked along the way.

Aisha asked her to forgive her family and not to be angry with them anymore. Hadija was happy to have such a caring friend.

They found many people at home. What a nice surprise! Hadija's birthday party was all set.

There was a big cake which made Hadija very happy. Everyone cheered her with a birthday song.

------------------------------------------------------------



Petros akaba ari omwana w'amagyezi. Akaba ari omwana omwe wenka.

Eizooba rimwe, Petros akaza kuzaana na banywani be.

Akabwa kato kakaba kakwatiirwe omu kiina. Petros yaakagira ati, "Ninza kukuhwera."

Embwa yaamoka, yaazina, yaarigasa Petros n'amashemererwa.

Munywani wa Petros yaabinga embwa. Petros yaagira ati, "Rekyera aho! Rekyera aho!"

Embwa yairuka, yaayeshereka abo boojo endahuzi.

Banywani ba Petros baamushanga naarira, baamugira bati, "Reka tuze kuronda embwa yaawe."

Petros akaba ataine matsiko g'okugibona. Banywani be baamugira ngu, "Nituza kugibona!"

Baaronda buri hantu. Petros yaagira ati, "Neebaasa kuba eri aha mugyera."

Embwa ekaba etiinire aboojo. Petros yaagyeta naagira ati, "Otarugaho aho!"

Embwa yairuka neeshanga Petros. Petros n'embwa baashemererwa.

Banywani be baagira bati, "Tusaasire. Nayo neeza kuba nywani yaitu."

------------------------------------------------------------



Fati was a little girl who ran like the wind.

She loved to laugh, and always tried hard to do as she was told.

One day, Fati went with her mother and father to look for firewood.

Fati liked to help her mother and father, but there was so much to do and so much to see.

There were birds, monkeys, and the sky!

Mother said, "Fati, please listen! You can look for firewood here and you can look for firewood there."

"But Fati, please watch where you go and be very careful." 

She replied, "Yes, mother."

Soon Fati's mother and father were very busy.

They found big pieces of firewood. 

They found small pieces of firewood.

Fati was also very busy. 

She found small pieces of firewood. 

She found very small pieces of firewood.

Then Fati looked up. 

She saw a red bird in the tall grass.

Next, Fati looked down. 

She saw a brown ant on the dusty path.

Fati saw a beautiful leaf. The leaf was shiny and green. 

She put one finger on the beautiful leaf.

Fati said, "This does not feel like a leaf." Suddenly, the beautiful leaf moved! 

Fati said, "This is not a beautiful leaf. This is a green snake!"

Fati screamed, "Eii!" 

She ran very fast to look for her mother and father.

Fati shouted, "A snake! A snake!" 

Father said, "Where? Where?" 

Fati said, "There! There!"

Then her father chased the green snake with a stick. 

The green snake slithered away.

Father said, "Fati, you are safe. 

Let's go to mother and tell her about the green snake."

Mother said, "Fati, I am happy the green snake did not bite you."

"But next time, please, look where you go, and be more careful." 

And that was the end of that.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, long ago, when there were no people, God looked down at the beautiful world he had made. 

He thought, "I must have someone to look after my creation."

Lion roared, "I am the king of the jungle, I can look after the world."

Elephant trumpeted loudly, "My Lord, you have made me so big and majestic. Surely, I am right for the job."

Whale wondered, "Can they swim and look after the fish, the reefs, the coral and millions of tiny sea animals? 

I can look after the oceans, keep my head above water and see what is on the land. I am LARGE, no one will do anything against your will."

Shark thought his sharp teeth were all that were needed to do the job.

Eagle laughed, "These animals can only look after those on land, while the whale and the shark can only see the water animals. 

But I fly, I see the sky, land and water. I am the only one fit to be the keeper of the world."

God listened carefully to the animals, to the fish and the birds. "I will create man," He said. 

The animals all wondered, what "man" was. What colour, with feathers or fur, or scales? Will he run like the lion? Swim like a fish? Fly high like the eagle?

The sun had set and it was night. God put the twinkle of stars into the eyes and used the black clouds for hair. 

He also put pieces of the moon in the nails and the shine of stars in the teeth. So the first man and woman were created with shiny black skins like the night.

Soon the night faded and it was morning. God covered himself in the white morning light. 

He took the blue sky for the eyes, the gold of the sun he spun into hair, and before him stood a man and woman with white skins, blue eyes and golden hair.

Now the morning had turned into afternoon. The sun was very bright, so he pulled the yellow light, and the deep black shadow of the afternoon. 

He made a man and woman with yellow skins, black hair and eyes that slanted to look into the sun.

It was evening and a few stars had appeared in the sky. God used the beautiful rich brown of the earth and the dusk of the sky for the skin. 

The black colour of the night was for the hair. He used the sparkle of stars for the eyes. God had a man and woman with brown skins, black hair and eyes.

The animals all looked in wonder at the strange creature who stood on two legs, with naked skin,  with no fur or feathers or even scales. 

Lion looked down his kingly nose and roared, "I can outrun them and with a swipe of my paw I can kill them, sorry for saying so."

Zebra suggested, "Some stripes would have improved their look." 

Leopard said, "A few spots would make them look nicer." 

Elephant trumpeted, "Surely, grey would have been a better colour?"

Shark looked at their teeth and smiled showing his sharp teeth. "Ah! No fins, how will they swim? And they are going to be the keeper. Ha! Ha! Ha!" 

The fish, big and small, laughed as they dived into the deep water leaving a trail of bubbles of laughter.

God smiled kindly, "Man will have to look after the animals, the oceans with all their life, and all the plants. The day he'll destroy the world with his greed, he'll be destroyed." 

The animals, the fish and the birds bowed their heads and hoped they would be safe. So let us, YOU and I, look after this wonderful world.

------------------------------------------------------------



I dance when I am happy, 
I dance when I am sad, 
I dance when I am lonely, 
I dance when I am angry.

My teacher says,  "Sit still! Don't dance about all day."

But my mother says, 
"Dancing makes you healthy,  
Dancing makes you tall, 
One day you'll be a dancer, 
And surprise them all!"

And I say, "One day I'll dance and people will pay just to see me leap and twirl."

"Her dancing is SO good," they'll say."

------------------------------------------------------------



The village of Kola had many problems including education. Children were not going to school.

Most of them would go around stealing, fighting and causing trouble.

One day, Havilah had an idea.

She walked from house to house.

She asked children to attend the Kids Village Meeting.

Children gathered under a mango tree and listened. 

Havilah said, "We need to put our heads together to get educated instead of going around fighting and stealing."

Seven-year-old Kelvin was sitting on a tree branch. 

He shouted, "My mother is a teacher. She could give us some lessons."

Samuel said, "My father has a book store. He could give us some books and pens for study."

Chika stood up and said, "My father is a carpenter. He could make us some chairs and tables."

Then they shouted together, "We can change our lives!"

From that day, they worked together to make their lives better.

------------------------------------------------------------



I heard that Granddad is sick. 

Now my brother is coughing, too.

Grandmother shows him how to cough into his elbow.

We call the hospital to talk to Granddad.

I pray that he gets better soon.

Mom buys masks so we can visit Granddad.

Brother stays at home just in case.

I wash my hands with soap before I leave.

I keep my hands clean when I greet my friend.

We take a taxi to the hospital.

Granddad feels better already.

------------------------------------------------------------



Bunty loves to play with butterflies.

And with birds.

She loves to play with paper boats.

She also likes to make sand castles.

When Bunty goes back home, her mother asks her to clean up. 

She refuses.

"I hate soap!" she screams.

One night, she has a dream. 

The germs are all around her castle, and are attacking her.

Bunty is chased by the germs. 

She runs for her life and screams, "Help. Help!"

Suddenly, Soap King Bubbly appears. "Bunty, don't be afraid," he says. "Go attack the germs!" the Soap King orders his army of bubbles.

The army of bubbles chases the germs away.

These days, Bunty likes to use soap, and she brushes and scrubs herself clean.

------------------------------------------------------------



"Yippee!" Zonke shouts when the school bell rings. At last he can go home. This afternoon he wants to play soccer with the other boys.

"Hey! Look out," a voice suddenly rings out in front of him. He never noticed Bheka. Bheka growls at him.

"Sorry," Zonke quickly replies. He wants to walk around Bheka. But Bheka suddenly pushes him. Zonke stumbles. Bheka laughs. "Do you have big feet that you fall so easily?" he mocks.

Annoyed Zonke straightens himself. A girl, Thandi,  helps him. "Thank you," Zonke says. "You're welcome," Thandi says. "I saw everything. Bheka really is a bully."

Zonke runs home. It's quite hot. Fortunately the house isn't far.

Suddenly, he notices something in the road. He stops. What is it? It is as big as the palm of his hand. It is brown. And it is made from leather.

It's a wallet! Zonke can't believe his luck.

He quickly glances inside the wallet. Wow, it contains money!

Zonke's heart beats faster. Then he puts the wallet in his pocket. He quickly glances around to see if someone noticed.

Yes! Somebody is approaching. It's Bheka. He is only a few steps behind Zonke.

Zonke hurries on. He hopes Bheka hasn't seen him. He doesn't want to glance over his shoulder again.

The wallet lies safely in his pocket. When he gets home he will take it out and see how much money it contains.

At home Zonke puts down his school case. Then he walks to the shady tree next to the house. Carefully he takes the wallet from his pocket. His heart beats faster. 

He counts the notes. Fifty one hundred a hundred and fifty two hundred Rand! He is mega rich. But then he hears a familiar voice. "What are you hiding?" It is Bheka!

Zonke hides the wallet behind his back. "Too late. I saw you picking something up," Bheka says. "That's why I came to check you out."

Bheka pulls Zonke's arm. His eyes grow wide when he sees the wallet. He takes it. "Wow! This is nice. Are you going to keep it?" Bheka asks.

"I don't know yet," Zonke stammers. Bheka also counts the money. "You know the saying: finders keepers." Bheka whistles. "You must surely keep it. If I picked it up, I would keep it."

"But somebody lost it," Zonke says. Bheka laughs. "So what? They were careless. That's why it's your money now."

"I will have to think about it," Zonke says. "You don't have to think about it," Bheka says. "I'll tell you what to do. KEEP THE MONEY. Buy yourself a new pair of shoes. Or a soccer ball."

"No!" a girl's voice sounds. It is Thandi from school. "Zonke, the money doesn't belong to you. You don't have the right to keep it."

"What do you know, Thandi?" Bheka asks. He pulls a face. "You're just trying to be miss smarty pants. Zonke doesn't have to return the money."

Zonke listens to the two of them. He doesn't know what to do. He would like to keep the money. But Thandi may be right. You can't take things that don't belong to you. Even if you pick them up.

Bheka suddenly stands right in front of him. Bheka folds his arms. "So, what are you going to do, Zonke? Will you keep the money? Or will you try to find the owner?"

Zonke thinks and thinks. "I'm going to return it," Zonke finally says loudly.

Thandi smiles. "That's the right thing to do. You'll see."

Bheka shakes his head. He returns the wallet to Zonke. "You're a coward," he says and leaves.

"You're not," Thandi tells Zonke softly. "If you keep the purse you will be as ugly as Bheka himself."

Zonke smiles. He is glad she has helped him make the right decision. "How are we going to find out whose money it is?" he asks.

Thandi looks inside the wallet. She takes out a bank card. Gugu Dube is written on the card. The name sounds familiar to Zonke.

Thandi removes something else from the wallet. It's a small picture of Gugu and her children.

Now Zonke recognises her. "She lives nearby. Come along. We're going to return her wallet."

Together Zonke and Thandi run along the gravel road. Auntie Gugu's door is open. 

They knock. In a moment someone comes to the door. It's auntie Gugu. Shame, she seems to be crying.

Zonke feels bad that auntie Gugu is crying. But then he takes the wallet from his pocket. Auntie Gugu's sad face immediately turns happy. She laughs.

"My wallet!" she shouts. "I can't believe it." She checks the money in the wallet. "And all the money is here. I am so happy. I had to go and buy some food. But then I lost my wallet. I thought we would go hungry this week."

She gives both Zonke and Thandi a kiss on the forehead. Then she danced around with joy.

After a while Zonke and Thandi walk home. Zonke is very glad that he did the honourable thing. 

Thandi is right. If he kept the wallet, he would be just as ugly as Bheka. But today he actually feels like a hero!

------------------------------------------------------------



In Miwa Forest, there lived a monkey who was always sad. 

This was because every time she had a baby, it died.

The pain of losing her babies made Monkey jump up and down. 

She would jump to one branch, then to another, and cry out, "Kwi! Kwi! Kwi!"

Monkey was sadder when she saw other monkeys with their babies.

The sad monkey sat on a branch. 

Days passed and she cried more and more.

Then she gave birth again. She decided to take the baby to the path.

She wanted people passing by, to see the baby and wish it well.

Monkey put her baby on the path. At that time, a hunter was returning home. 

He saw the baby monkey lying on the side of the path.

The hunter carried the baby monkey to his house. 

When the hunter reached home, his three sons wanted to hold the baby monkey.

The boys sang: 

Throw it up! 
Throw it down! 
Throw it to me! 
Throw it to him! 

The baby monkey was thrown from one child to the other.

Mother Monkey hid in a tree and watched them. 

She was afraid that this baby would also die, like the others.

Then the hunter's wife saw her children playing with the little monkey. 

She said, "Be careful! Bring it here. You will drop it!"

She took the baby monkey in her arms, and blessed it.

The hunter's wife put the baby monkey down. Mother Monkey picked the baby up and disappeared into the forest. 

Mother Monkey never lost another baby from then on.

------------------------------------------------------------



One day, we saw a strange black cloud move in from far away. 

It was a swarm of locusts, headed for our village.

The locusts attacked farms and ate the crops.

We tried to chase the locusts away. 

But they would not go.

We made noises and screamed, "Wuwi, wuwi!" 

But the locusts would not go.

We hit tins and metal pots. 

But the locusts would not go.

We lit fires to chase the locusts away. 

But they would not go.

They settled on trees. 

Branches broke because of the weight of all the locusts.

Then we remembered that roasted locusts are good to eat! 

Everyone started to collect the locusts in sacks and nets.

Children brought gourds and filled them with locusts.

We roasted locusts and fried them. We even dried locusts for the cold season. 

But still, there were so many locusts.

Then, the next morning, the locusts flew away. 

The cloud left our village.

When the farmers saw their farms, they moaned loudly, "Our farms are destroyed!" 

The villagers cried, "What will we eat this year? What have the locusts left us?"

------------------------------------------------------------



Cheetah was king of all animals. One day he called all the animals to his palace. 

They gathered and listened to what their king was to say.

He said, "You must obey my orders."

All the animals agreed to follow the orders of their king.

King Cheetah was afraid that he would be overthrown.

He decided to test the strength of the animals. He wanted to know the ones that were stronger than him.

The next day King Cheetah said to Warthog, "Throw the  spear to show your strength."

Then King Cheetah said to Elephant, "It is your turn to throw the spear." 

Elephant is a strong animal. He did it better than Warthog.

Next, King Cheetah noticed that Antelope was hiding behind other animals. He called her and said, "It is your turn, Antelope."

Other animals encouraged Antelope to try and not to be afraid.

Antelope threw the spear with all her strength. She was better than Warthog and Elephant.

King Cheetah was very angry.

Lastly, King Cheetah asked Baboon, "Do you want to try it?" Baboon threw the spear with all his strength and beat all others.

From that day King Cheetah knew that he was not the only one who was strong.

------------------------------------------------------------



Lynne, Oupa Karel and Anton were getting things ready for Lynne's birthday party.

Anton and Lynne are going to bake a cake. Oupa Karel reads the recipe.

"Let's mix these ingredients in the big bowl," said Lynne.

Anton stirred the ingredients and made a big mess.

"The cake feels heavy now," said Oupa Karel.

"Your friends have arrived," said Oupa Karel.

Anton thought the first present would be heavy because it was big.

It was a pillow and it weighed very little.

Anton thought the next present would be light because it was small.

It was a painted rock and it weighed a lot.

The children said that 1 kilogram of rocks weighs the same as 1 kilogram of feathers.

Lynne's cake was burnt.

Lynne was very sad.

Auntie Mavis asked Anton to guess how much her present weighed.

"It weighs the same as the cake that burned," said Anton.

Everyone said, "happy birthday, Lynne."

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a man called Hupapa who lived in the village of Mugulu.

One day,  Death came to visit Hupapa.

Hupapa was scared to see the visitor.

"Your turn to see your God has come," said Death. 

"But I'm not ready," cried Hupapa. Death insisted that it was Hupapa's turn.

Hupapa served Death with a delicious meal.

After the meal,  Death fell asleep. 

Hupapa picked up Death's list and wrote his name at the bottom.

When Death woke up,  he was happy with Hupapa's hospitality. 

So he opted to begin with the names at the bottom of his list.

Unfortunately,  Hupapa had written his name at the bottom.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a small boy named Musau. 

He lived with his father Syonzola.

Syonzola stayed out drinking until very late every night. 

Musau hardly ever saw him.

When Syonzola came home, he would scream, "Villagers! Villagers! Come and rescue me! I am being attacked by a hyena."

On hearing Syonzola's screams, the villagers would come with their arrows, spears and machetes, to rescue him. 

But they would find that he was drunk and just teasing them.

Syonzola continued drinking and shouting for help late at night. The villagers continued going with arrows, spears and machetes to rescue him. 

But each time it was the same story. He would only be teasing them.

Every time Syonzola returned home late, Musau would be woken by his screams for help. 

Musau knew his father's voice very well. He would listen as Syonzola moved in the dark until he reached the door of their house.

One night, Syonzola came home drunk as usual. But this time, a hyena actually hid near the house. 

When he screamed, the hyena fiercely attacked him.

Syonzola screamed so loudly. But the villagers said,  "We are tired of Syonzola's tricks."  

They turned over in their beds and went back to sleep.

As usual, Syonzola's screams woke up his son. On that night, Musau listened for his father's steps as he always did. 

But his father did not seem to move closer to the house. Musau sat up and listened more keenly.

"My father is really in danger," Musau said. "This time he is not teasing."

Musau jumped up from his bed. 

He grabbed a smouldering log from the fire and rushed out of the hut.

"Father, father," he called. In the moonlight, Musau saw Syonzola struggling with an animal. 

He raised the burning log. When the hyena saw the fiery log, he ran away.

After that, Syonzola never went out again to drink. 

He spent his days telling interesting stories to the school children.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time,  Crocodile was sitting near a big lake basking in the sun. Ape arrived at the water and they greeted each other.

Ape asked where Crocodile lived. Crocodile answered,  "I live in the lake."  Ape was amazed. She asked Crocodile,  "How is life in the water? Is it good?"

Crocodile answered,  "Life in the water is good. Where do you live?" Ape answered,  "I live in the trees. I eat fruits and leaves. What do you eat?"

Crocodile answered,  "I eat meat." She was already thinking of how to catch Ape and eat her. She asked Ape,  "Can you swim?"

Ape answered,  "No,  No! I cannot swim." Crocodile said,  "Let me teach you how to swim." Ape answered,  "No,  I am not interested."

Crocodile lied to Ape saying,  "We have become friends. Do not be afraid of me. Come,  sit on my back." So Ape sat on Crocodile's back and Crocodile started swimming.

When they reached in the middle of the lake,  Crocodile asked Ape,  "How do you feel being in the lake? Are you comfortable?"  Ape answered,  "It is interesting and I am happy."

Crocodile sighed and said to Ape,  "My uncle is very sick. We haven't found the medicine to treat him."

Ape was so afraid that she was trembling. She wondered how she would escape from Crocodile.

Then Ape had an idea. She said to Crocodile,  "Do not worry. I will give my heart for your uncle. Ape meat will cure him."

Crocodile was impressed. She said,  "Really! Would you be willing to give your heart for my uncle?" Ape answered,  "Yes of course. We are friends!"

A short while later,  Ape said,  "Oh! I'm really sorry my friend. I forgot my heart in a tree. Let's go back so I can fetch it."

Crocodile hesitated and then asked,  "Are you sure? Will you bring your heart from the tree?" Ape answered,  "Yes,  I will bring it. I will even go with you to visit your uncle."

Crocodile agreed and swam back to the shore of the lake. As soon as they reached land,  Ape jumped from Crocodile's back.

From the safety of a tree branch,  Ape called,  "Good bye my friend,  Crocodile. Thank you for the lake tour."

Crocodile was angry. She hissed,  "So,  did you lie to me? Are you coming back with your heart?"  Ape responded,  "I was able to sit on your back only because my heart was with me!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Goat, Dog and Cow were great friends. One day they went on a journey in a taxi.

They reached the end of their journey. The driver asked them to pay their fares. Cow paid her fare.

Dog paid extra, because he did not have the correct money.

The driver was about to give Dog his change. Suddenly, Goat ran away without paying.

The driver was very annoyed. He drove away without giving Dog his change.

That is why, even today, Dog runs towards a car to peep inside. He is looking for the driver who owes him change.

Goat runs away from the sound of a car. She is afraid she will be arrested for not paying her fare.

Cow is not bothered by cars. Cow takes her time crossing the road. She knows she paid her fare in full.

------------------------------------------------------------



With my nose.

I smell dirty socks.

I smell beautiful flowers.

With my eyes.

I see a balloon blowing away in the wind.

I see a happy cat.

With my mouth.

I taste the salty sea.

I taste a juicy sweet orange.

With my hand.

I take your hand.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a giant man who was bigger than everyone in his village. This man's name was Dungdit.

Dungdit was so big that small children in the village were afraid of him.

Dungdit liked hunting, fishing, and farming. He liked trekking for miles around his village.

He worked quickly and enthusiastically. He sang songs as he worked, and always finished his work before others finished theirs.

This giant was always hungry. He was rarely satisfied by the food he ate. His friends and family shared their food with him, but his stomach didn't easily get full.

Sometimes Dungdit was so hungry that he stole food from his friends and family!

In his village, people ate mostly millet with fish or meat. To satisfy his hunger, the giant began to try new types of food. He tried fruits and vegetables. He tried berries, leaves, roots, and stems from edible plants. 

Dungdit added fruits and vegetables to his diet. He became stronger, happier, and healthier.

Because of his new diet, Dungdit grew even bigger and stronger.

People in the village told him, "You look good!" And they asked, "What have you been eating recently?"

"I have been eating leaves, tubers, fruits, and vegetables," he answered.

Soon, everyone in the village was eating a balanced diet with vegetables, fruits, millet, and fish.

Everyone became healthier, stronger, and happier.

The people of the village gave Dungdit a plot of land so that he could farm fruit and vegetables. They helped him with the daily activities.

The villagers said to Dungdit, "You have positively changed our lives, we want to change your life! We want you to be our leader, and to explore more things that can improve our lives." 

The people sang and shouted, "Long live our great, generous, giant leader!"

------------------------------------------------------------



One day I met Agnes. 

Agnes is a teacher.

Agnes uses crutches to walk.

When I went to town, I saw Metobo. 

He is a radio DJ.

Metobo has albinism. 

He has problems with his eyes and with his skin.

My neighbour is Moraa. 

She is a farmer.

Moraa has a problem with hearing. 

She speaks using Sign Language.

Osero is the best soccer player in my school. 

I like to watch him play.

Osero lost his hands in an accident. 

However, he scores many goals for his team!

My sister Jackie plays sports.  

She is stronger than my brother!

I know that people with disabilities can do anything.

Every person has different abilities.

We can all work, play and have fun!

------------------------------------------------------------



My mother planted. She planted a small garden. 

She planted a small garden of peas.

My father planted. He planted a small garden. 

He planted a small garden of flowers.

My mother weeded in both gardens.

My father watered in both gardens.

My parents and I worked in the small gardens. 

My sister and I harvested the flowers and peas.

The small garden of peas yielded sacks of peas. 

The small garden of flowers yielded sacks of flowers.

My mother planted. She planted a large garden. 

She planted a large garden of peas.

My father planted. He planted a large garden. 

He planted a large garden of flowers.

------------------------------------------------------------



















------------------------------------------------------------



Knock! Knock!

"Who is there?" I ask sleepily.

"It is me," a shrill voice says.

"Who is 'me'?" I ask.

"I told you,  it is o-n-l-y m-e," the same voice says.

"I don't know anyone called,  'o-n-l-y m-e'," I reply. 

I check that my mosquito net is tucked in around my bed.

"Well, my name is Amos." 

The voice sounds more shrill than before. It is very close to my ear.

"Amos who?" I ask as I look under the net.

"Amos Quito," the voice finally says. 

I feel a bite on my ear.

"Ouch!" I jump up and begin to search. 

"You will pay for this!" I shout.

Angrily, I get out of bed and switch on the light.

I declare war on the annoying Amos Quito!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once a upon a time, Hare and Hyena were great neighbours. They use to talk about the families and how beautiful the world is. 

Hyena used to own a huge farm which he loved dearly, but it was too much work for him to plant everything by himself.

Hare used to sit all day doing nothing and when Hyena came home after work, Hare would always ask him for nuts from his farm. 

But Hyena didn't like this very much. Hyena believes in working hard and not getting things for free.

So one day, Hyena thought to himself, "Its so hard to work all day by myself. Maybe Hare could help me and in return he can get some nuts that he has actually worked for." 

Hare agreed to his terms and they shook hands on it because he thought it was a good deal. They also agreed that more work could be done and they will also get enough food for their families.

The two worked so good together. They would work and laugh together. Hare would dig and plant and Hyena would help and sing along as they went. 

Hyena was very happy because he was able to plant a lot more than before.

Hare was a really hard worker and worked all day long with no rest. He would work fast and faster. 

But he felt like he was working too much and wanted a raise because what Hyena was paying too little.

He took the Hyena to the Field and showed him all the grown crops and he said to hyena, "Look at all this, I planted everything and I deserve to be paid more," Hare said. 

Hyena looked very disturbed and said, "No, we did this together so I can't pay you more. Don't forget whose farm this is." He shouted. 

But Hare was not very happy about this and walked away angry and disappointed.

Hyena was very worried. He went home and thought to himself, "How am I going to solve this because Hare is a very hard worker indeed and I can't afford to lose him." 

So Hyena called Hare for a meeting and asked him, "How much more nuts do you want?" Hare was very clever so he thought about it for a while, excitedly he said, "Mmmmm do you know what would make me happy? Is if you gave me half of your farm and keep the other half."

Hyena thought for a moment. "Fine you can have some only if you keep working as hard as you have been doing." 

Hare smiled knowing he had made a great deal. So he agreed to this immediately.

But as time went by, Hare stopped working as hard and instead he would sit and sing all day. 

Hyena worked so hard and so long, that he was beginning to hate Hare. He was disappointed and wondered why he even agreed to the terms in the first place.

Hyena got very worried about Hare's bad behaviour. One day Hyena came up with a brilliant idea to solve both their problem. "I wanted us to be friends and good neighbours but now we have a problem," said Hyena. 

"We are good friends we have shared a farm, good friends respect each other," Hare agreed. 

"I don't like how you do things, you are lazy and not keeping to the agreement," said Hyena.

"If you don't help with the chores then get off my farm," said Hyena. Hare refused to get off because he was use to the free food that he was getting. But Hyena was fed up and chased him away and warned him, "If I ever catch you on my farm again, I will eat you." 

That is why to this day Hyena is always chasing Hare when he sees him near his land and Hare is always hiding in the fields trying to steal food from farms.

------------------------------------------------------------



Drones are marvels of technology that come in all shapes and sizes.

Some are small enough to fit on your palm. Others will dwarf you in size and are powerful enough to carry you high up into the air.

We are familiar with drones as used in photography and videography, but they have many more uses than that.

Most drones consist of a number of helicopter-like propellers that spin using an electric motor. They have rechargeable batteries onboard that power all the controls and propulsion.

The person who flies a drone is called a pilot. He must have a license to operate the drone.

A pilot flies the drone using a remote control.

Drones can be designed to perform different functions on a farm. They can be fitted with cameras that use AI to identify sick plants or weeds. The farmers can then go directly to the affected sections.

They can have tanks and sprayers to spray pesticides and avoid exposing people to harmful chemicals.

Farmers with big ranches can use drones to track their animals. With the help of machine vision built in, they can count the animals.

They can also differentiate between sick and healthy animals as well as the state of the pastures.

This saves the farmer time to go out physically in cars or horses which is time-consuming and costly.

In Kenya, the government uses drones to monitor the animals in our national parks. This ensures that they are safe from poachers. They can identify and track the location of unauthorized individuals.

They can also be used to determine which animals are sick or lacking food during droughts. The park officials can cater for them by bringing food and water.

A drone can be retrofitted to have a payload of a standard package. This can be used for package delivery over short distances.

A shopkeeper may deliver items to a customer's house. A farmer may deliver his produce to the market without leaving his farm.

This saves them time and money as drones are inexpensive to run.

A medical drone has the same function as a delivery drone. It can deliver equipment and medicine to hard-to-reach areas.

It can be used during disasters where infrastructure may be non-existent. For example, when roads and bridges have been swept away by floods. The drone will quickly reach the affected areas.

Another form of specialized drone is used for weather monitoring. This drone is fitted with special instruments and sensors. They detect temperature, cloud cover, wind speed, pressure and other aspects. 

This drone can be used to move to a specific area without a weather station. It can collect data on the current weather or measure pollution.

Racing drones are small, lightweight and powerful. They are fast and agile. They can travel at speeds over 200km/h and can change direction rapidly.

People use them for sporting competitions with teams supporting their drones and pushing innovation.

The fastest civilian drone in the world reaches an astonishing 480km/h.

Unmanned vehicles are not only found in the air. They are also underwater where they explore the depths of water bodies. Scientists use them to discover new species of plants and animals in the Ocean Ecosystem.

The drones can get to hard-to-reach places where human beings are unable to access. These drones are operated from ships.

The final drone on this list is the military drone. These are more advanced and are very expensive and powerful.

They can be controlled from hundreds of kilometers away and can travel equally far. They carry weapons and specialized spying equipment.

These are used for performing attacks and reconnaissance. Some are powered by fuel as well.

1. What is a UAV?
2. Who flies a drone?
3. What is the current highest speed of a drone?
4. Which drone is controlled from ships?
5. How small is the smallest drone?

------------------------------------------------------------



How many cats? 

0 Zero cats.

How many cats? 

1 One cat.

How many cats? 

2 Two cats.

How many cats? 

3 Three cats.

How many cats? 

4 Four cats.

How many cats? 

5 Five cats.

How many cats? 

6 Six cats.

How many cats? 

7 Seven cats.

How many cats? 

8 Eight cats.

What is this we see? 

A kitten is stuck in a tree! 

"I will rescue you!"

"Mama,  can we keep him? Just one more!" 

How many cats? 

9 Nine cats.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was an old woman who loved her grandson very much. She gave him an egg as a gift. 

She said, "From this egg you will get bride wealth for your marriage when you are of age." 

And the boy went on his way.

First he met some blackberry gatherers who asked him for the egg. 

They used it to shoot at the berries and it broke.

The boy cried, "Ei ei ei! You have caused trouble for me! The egg was not mine. It belonged to my grandmother.

And grandmother didn't give it to me for nothing. She gave it to me to get bride wealth."

So the berry gatherers gave him the stick they used to bring down the berries. 

And the boy walked on.

Next, the boy met some builders who asked him for his stick. 

They used it to build a house and it broke into pieces.

The boy cried, "Hee! You have caused trouble for me! The stick was not mine, it belonged to the berry gatherers. And they didn't give it to me for nothing. They gave it to me in place of my egg. 

The egg was not mine. It belonged to my grandmother. And grandmother didn't give it to me for nothing. She gave it to me to get bride wealth."

So the builders gave him a bundle of grass for thatching. 

And the boy walked on.

Next, the boy found a herdsman who asked for the boy's bundle of grass. 

The herdsman gave it to the cow and the cow ate it all up.

The boy cried, "Eee! You have caused trouble for me! The grass was not mine. It belonged to the builders. The builders did not give it to me for nothing. They broke my stick. The stick was not mine. It belonged to the berry gatherers. And they didn't give it to me for nothing. They gave it to me in place of my egg. 

The egg was not mine. It belonged to my grandmother. And grandmother did not give it to me for nothing. She gave it to me to get bride wealth."

So the herdsman gave the boy his cow. 

And the boy walked on.

While on his way home, the boy came across a marriage celebration. The bride's family asked him for his cow. 

He gave it to them. And they slaughtered it and ate it all.

The boy cried, "Ei! You have caused trouble for me! The cow was not mine. It belonged to the herdsman. The herdsman didn't give it to me for nothing. He gave it to me in place of my bundle of grass. The grass was not mine. It belonged to the builders. The builders didn't give it to me for nothing. They broke my stick. The stick was not mine. It belonged to the berry gatherers. They didn't give it to me for nothing. 

They gave it to me in place of my egg. The egg was not mine. It belonged to grandmother. Grandmother gave it to me to get bride wealth."

Then the bride's family said, "We have nothing left to pay you. But let us give you the bride." 

And so, the saying came to pass that, "What goes round comes around!"

------------------------------------------------------------



For many months, the skies were dry. Lomongin, the famous rain-maker, talked to his gods. 

People gathered outside his home, anxiously waiting for a message of hope.

When he came out, he assured people that the creator was going to give them rain soon. 

They would be able to plant their crops.

Children played outside as we waited for the rains. 

Later that day, we saw big white clouds in the far east. I knew they were rain clouds.

People were still thinking about what the rain-maker said. 

Mother shouted loudly, "There! The clouds are now dark. Come inside."

The rain poured down. 

It poured, and poured, and poured!

We had waited for the rains! At first we rejoiced. 

But the rains did not stop.

There was water everywhere. 

The bridge linking our village to the mainland was washed away.

Houses were washed away by floods. 

What was a blessing, was now a disaster for us.

Everybody had prepared for planting. But now they could not plant. People of my village had longed for rain. Now they did not want it anymore. 

We had no bridge to cross on. Many had no homes.

And, we had another problem! We saw crocodiles swimming everywhere. 

This had never happened before. We were confused.

We could not go shopping because all the shops were across the river. 

Children couldn't go to school because schools were across the river.

What should have been a blessing, became a curse to us. Lomongin, the rain-maker, was disappointed as well. 

The only one who was happy, was Kapuus with his eight cats!

------------------------------------------------------------



Long time ago, Mojo the bird lived in a kingdom called Baro. Tortoise was his friend.

Mojo was a messenger and travelled far to deliver messages.

One day the lion king called for Mojo. 

The king wanted him to deliver an important message to another kingdom. His relative Tiger was the king there.

When Tortoise heard about this he felt jealous.

He advised Mojo, "Do not go. It is a trap. Lion wants to send you as a sacrifice."

Mojo felt scared. The next day, he went to his relative Cock. Mojo told him what Tortoise had said. 

Cock did not trust Tortoise.

"I will make you a delicious meal tonight," offered Tortoise when he met Mojo later. 

Mojo happily went to Tortoise's house for dinner.

As Mojo was relaxing, Tortoise threw a net over him! Then he went out to fetch firewood. 

Mojo could not move. "Help me, help me!" he cried.

Cock was near Tortoise's house. He heard Mojo shouting. He called "Mojo? Mojo?"

"Cock! Come and rescue me!" responded Mojo. Cock hurried to where Mojo was trapped.

Cock freed Mojo from the net. 

Mojo thanked Cock and they ran away.

Mojo told Lion about this. The king banished Tortoise from the kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------



Mandu lived with his grandparents, his aunt and an uncle. He had a hen, a goat, a sheep and a pig.

The hen stayed in a small cage. The goat, sheep and pig were each tied on the side of the wall. The grandparents were still well. The aunt and uncle helped with the work.

This changed few years later. Mandu's grandparents aged and could not hear or see well.

His aunt became sickly and could not help clean the house.

His uncle slept all the time and did not help to feed the animals.

The animals made so much noise because they were hungry.

The house was so dirty because the aunt did not clean it.

Mandu was tired all the time. He had to go out every day to look for food for them all.

Mandu could not cope with the situation anymore. He asked his elderly grandparents for a solution. He was unhappy because his grandparents did not hear him.

His sick aunt said, "All I want is to be able to sleep at night and wake up in the morning."

His lazy uncle said, "Sell the animals and buy food for your grandparents. They will sleep and won't bother you."

Mandu was angry. He said, "Uncle, you know that I cannot sell the animals. They are the only wealth I have."

One night Mandu lay awake. He remembered a wise man who was believed to have solutions to all problems.

Mandu took his animals and visited the wise man. He kept a rope on the goat, sheep and pig and carried the hen.

Mandu arrived at the wise man's home, tired and hungry.

After explaining his problem to the wise man, the wise man said, "I will help you but you must do as I say."

Mandu replied, "I will do anything to solve my problem."

The wise man said, "Leave the animals here and go back to your house."

Mandu said, "But I have lived with my animals for a long time. They are the only wealth I have."

The wise man said, "I told you I would help you but you must do as I say."

Mandu needed a solution to his problem. He left his animals and returned home.

His house was too quiet and empty. Everybody missed the animals. Mandu's grandparents complained because they had no milk from the goat. 

The uncle said, "We are so poor, everyone is laughing at us."

Mandu could not cope with the complaints anymore. Besides, he missed his animals too. 

He returned to the wise man to ask for advice. "Life is very different without my animals in the house. My relatives miss them too much."

The wise man said, "I will help you but you must do as I tell you. Go home and take your grandparents out of the house."

Mandu said, "How can I do that? They are my grandparents and they depend on me."

In the end, Mandu went home and did as he was told. He did not have any peace of mind.

His grandparents had nowhere to go. They wandered around, trying not to bump into things. They felt the heat during the day and the cold at night.

His sick aunt cried, "Don't throw me out!" 

His lazy uncle cried, "Don't throw me out either!"

Mandu could not take it anymore. He returned to the wise man confused and angry.

He cried saying, "This is too much for one person. Give me a better solution."

The wise man said, "Here, take your animals home and return your grandparents in the house."

Mandu did as he was told. His aunt said, "I will clean the house."

His uncle stopped being lazy and helped Mandu with work. They were all happy once more.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, a man and five animals were going to war together. They traveled all day until the sun went down. 

"Where are we going to sleep?" asked Donkey. 

"Look, there's a hut. We can sleep there," said Snake.

A man and a woman came out. The man said, "You can sleep here, but we don't have food for you."

"What about the cow outside your house?" asked Dog. "It's the only thing we have," the wife said. 

Man said, "We will all reward you. Please kill the cow for us."

"If you give me its blood, I'll repay you," said Lion. "I'll reward you if you give me the bones," said Dog. "Give me the fat," said Snake. "I want the meat under the skin. I'll reward you," said Eagle. 

"Let me have the milk," Man said. "I'll reward you one day." "Give me some grass from your roof," Donkey said.

The husband and wife killed their cow.

They gave the blood to Lion, the bones to Dog, the milk to Man, the fat to Snake, and the meat under the skin, to Eagle. 

Donkey got grass from the roof of the hut.

The travelers slept well that night. 

The next morning they went away.

Many weeks passed.

Then, one day, the man and his wife heard Lion roaring near their hut. They went outside and found a big elephant tusk lying on the ground. 

"This is very valuable," the woman said to her husband. "Take it into the house," her husband said. "We must be careful. Perhaps thieves will come and steal it."

Just then, Dog barked. The husband and wife looked behind them. Dog was lying near the door of the house. 

"Don't worry," he said. "I'll keep the thieves away. You helped me once and now I'll help you."

Now, the husband had a wicked brother. He was rich, he was cruel, and everyone hated him. 

He heard about the elephant tusk. "I want that tusk," he thought. "I'll kill my brother and take it from him."

Late at night, he went to his brother's house. 

But Puff Adder was lying on the path, waiting for him. It bit the wicked brother and he died.

In that country, a dead man's brother takes his wealth. So, the wicked brother's cows and sheep belonged to the husband and his wife. 

"Lion, Dog and Puff Adder have repaid us well," the man said to his wife. "What will Eagle, Donkey and the man do?"

One day, Eagle saw a crowd of elders walking along the road. Something bright was shining in their hands. 

"They have money and jewels," thought Eagle. "They are taking presents from a wife to her husband, or from a husband to his wife, to end a quarrel. But they will forgive each other anyway."

Eagle flew down and took the gifts out of the elders' hands. 

He dropped them outside the hut of the man and his wife.

On the same day, Donkey was in a forest not far away. He had a heavy bag full of money on his back. Donkey's master beat him saying, "Go faster, you stupid, lazy animal!"

Donkey wanted to punish his cruel master.

Donkey ran away, and went to the hut of the husband and wife. "Take the money," he said. "It's yours." 

The man and his wife were rich now.

"Our friends the animals have been very good to us," the man said. "I'm glad we killed our cow for them." 

"The man has not repaid us yet," his wife said. "The animals have done many things for us, but the man will certainly do more."

They waited and waited. Weeks passed, then months and years, but the man never came back. 

Animals keep their promises, but humans forget theirs.

------------------------------------------------------------



Andiswa watched the boys play soccer. She wished that she could join them. 

She asked the coach if she could practise with them.

The coach put his hands on his hips. "At this school,  only boys are allowed to play soccer," he said.

The boys told her to go and play netball. They said that netball is for girls and soccer is for boys. 

Andiswa was upset.

The next day, the school had a big soccer match. 

The coach was worried because his best player was sick and could not play.

Andiswa begged the coach, "Please, let me play." 

The coach was not sure what to do. Then he decided that Andiswa could join the team.

The game was tough. 

Nobody had scored a goal by half time.

During the second half of the match, Andiswa got the ball. She moved very fast towards the goal post. 

Andiswa kicked the ball hard and scored a goal.

The crowd went wild with joy. 

Since that day, girls were also allowed to play soccer at the school.

------------------------------------------------------------



Musa lives with his parents in the village of Kagadama, in Nigeria. 

He is an intelligent boy, but he is stubborn.

Musa is also a bully. He always beats his friends. 

Whenever he comes across animals he also beats them.

One day on his way back from school, he sees a cat. 

He picks up the cat and goes home with it.

When his father sees him, he says "Musa stop abusing that cat! Take it back to where you found it."

Musa refuses to return the cat and locks it in a cage.

As he is sleeping in his room that night, Musa has a dream. 

Musa sees the cat growing bigger and running towards him. Its mouth is open, with sharp teeth. It wants to eat him!

The cat starts to swallow his feet. It eats half way up to Musa's knees. 

Then he wakes up.

The next day Musa returns the cat to where he found it. 

From then, he promises to be a good boy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Lion is thirsty, so he goes to get a drink of water from the pond.

He goes into the water to take a drink.

After drinking, Lion tries to get out. 

He is stuck in the mud!

A moment later, Monkey comes walking by the pond.

Lion sees Monkey and calls out, "Help me!"

Monkey pulls Lion out of the pond. 

They both rest for a moment under a tree.

While he is resting, Lion realises that he is hungry. 

He turns to Monkey and says, "I am hungry now, so I will eat you!"

"Why are you going to eat me after I just saved you?" Monkey asks. 

He is frightened.

As they are talking, Fox comes walking by. 

He can see there is a problem. 

"What is wrong?" asks Fox.

Monkey cries, "I saved Lion and now he is going to eat me." 

Monkey is so scared that he doesn't realise he can save himself!

Fox sees the tree. "Look up to the sky," he tells Monkey. 

Monkey looks up. 

He jumps into the tree and climbs to the top.

Monkey is safe at the top of the tree. 

Fox quickly turns to run away before Lion can eat him.

------------------------------------------------------------



Today we are going to the zoo.

We are going in dad's car.

We are going to see animals at the zoo.

Look! An elephant. 

Look! A lion.

Look! Pink birds.

Look! Ice cream. 

Look! Sweets.

Look! A clown with balloons.

Dad buys us nice things.

We are ready to go home.

We saw many animals today.

We are happy and tired.

I wish every day was like today!

------------------------------------------------------------



In the busy city,  far away from a caring life at home,  lived a group of homeless boys. They welcomed each day just as it came. 

On one morning, the boys were packing their mats after sleeping on cold pavements. To chase away the cold they lit a fire. 

Among the group of boys was Magozwe. He was the youngest.

When Magozwe's parents died, he was only five years old. He went to live with his uncle. This man did not care about the child. 

He did not give Magozwe enough food. He made the boy do a lot of hard work.

If Magozwe complained or questioned, his uncle beat him. 

When Magozwe asked if he could go to school, his uncle beat him and said, "You're too stupid to learn anything."

After three years of this treatment Magozwe ran away from his uncle. He started living on the street.

Street life was difficult and most of the boys struggled daily just to get food. Sometimes they were arrested, sometimes they were beaten. 

When they were sick, there was no one to help. The boys survived from begging, and selling plastics and other recycling material.

One day, Magozwe was looking through the garbage bins. He found an old tattered storybook. He cleaned the dirt from it and put it in his sack. 

Every day after that he would take out the book and look at the pictures. He did not know how to read the words.

The pictures told the story of a boy who grew up to be a pilot.

Magozwe would daydream of being a pilot. 

Sometimes, he imagined that he was the boy in the story.

It was cold and Magozwe was standing on the road begging. A man walked up to him. "Hello, I'm Thomas. I work at a place where you can get something to eat," he said. 

Thomas pointed to a house nearby. "Do you want to go there to get some food?" he asked. 

Magozwe looked at the man, and then at the house. "Maybe," he said, and walked away.

Over the months that followed, the homeless boys got used to seeing Thomas around. He liked to talk to people, especially people living on the streets. 

Thomas listened to the stories of people's lives. He was patient and respectful. Some of the boys started going to the yellow house to get food.

Magozwe was sitting on the pavement looking at his picture book when Thomas sat down next to him. 

"What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "I think it's about a boy who becomes a pilot," replied Magozwe. 

"What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "I don't know, I can't read," said Magozwe.

When they met, Magozwe began to tell his own story to Thomas. It was the story of his uncle and why he ran away.

Thomas didn't talk a lot, and he didn't tell Magozwe what to do, but he always listened carefully.

Around Magozwe's tenth birthday, Thomas gave him a new storybook. It was a story about a village boy who grew up to be a famous soccer player. 

Thomas read that story to Magozwe many times, until one day he said, "I think it's time you went to school and learned to read. What do you think?"

Thomas explained that he knew of a place where children could stay, and go to school.

Magozwe thought about this new place, and about going to school. 

What if his uncle was right and he was too stupid to learn anything? What if they beat him at this new place?

He was afraid. "Maybe it is better to stay living on the street," he thought.

He shared his fears with Thomas.

Over time Thomas reassured Magozwe that life could be better at the new place.

And so Magozwe moved into a house and shared the room with two other boys. There were ten children living at that house. 

Along with Auntie Cissy and her husband, three dogs, a cat, and an old goat.

Magozwe started school and it was difficult. He had a lot to catch up. Sometimes he wanted to give up. 

But he thought about the pilot and the soccer player in the storybooks. Like them, he did not give up.

Magozwe was sitting in the yard at the house where he stayed, reading a storybook from school. 

Thomas came up and sat next to him. "What is the story about?" asked Thomas. "It's about a boy who becomes a teacher," replied Magozwe. 

"What's the boy's name?" asked Thomas. "His name is Magozwe," said Magozwe with a smile.

------------------------------------------------------------



Melokuhle was born in a small, diverse rural township in South Africa. 

South Africans speak many different languages, like isiXhosa, Sesotho, isiZulu, Shona, English and Afrikaans – even in one household. 

Melokuhle's mother speaks isiXhosa and her father speaks Sesotho. Her father lives and works in a city far away.

Melokuhle's mother works in a shop owner's house in town. She has a firstborn child called Anathi, who is 15 years old, and two young children. Asante is four years old, and Melokuhle is six months old.

It is early in the morning and it is still dark and cold outside. Anathi steps onto the misty street and pulls the shawl close around her neck. 

Melokuhle is warm and cosy against the wind, wrapped in a blanket and sleeping on her sister's back. Asante walks next to them, holding Anathi's hand.

Anathi is taking Melokuhle and Asante to the play centre down the road. As she walks, Anathi sings a song.

Melokuhle and Asante are the first to arrive at Iindumiso Centre. 

Nolulamo runs this play centre for children from birth to four years old. The centre is a small four-roomed house. 

Inside the play centre it is warm, heated up by the stove on which porridge is cooking.

Anathi greets Nolulamo in Sesotho, "Dumela Mme." 

Nolu responds in isiXhosa, "Mholweni, Anathi" and to Asante, "Mholo, Sante. Unjani namhlanje?" Asante replies but he is shy, "Philile."

Nolu tries to get Asante's attention, "Ungxamelephi na awandihoya?" He replies, "Qhuba imoto," and goes off by himself to the car toys.

Nolu takes Melokuhle gently from her older sister's back and lays her on the mattress in the next room for babies.

Meanwhile, Asante plays with cars on the road mat until the other children arrive.

Melokuhle wakes up and Nolu changes her nappy.

"Melo, Melo! Ubonwabele ubuthongo bakho. You enjoyed your sleep, neh?" She smiles at Melokuhle.

Nolu laughs and shakes her head. Melokuhle copies Nolu, shaking her head and giggling.

Nolu speaks to Melokuhle, "Masitshintshe ke ngoku," making eye contact. "Kufuneka sicoceke, sinuke kamnandi, xa sizakutya." She wants Melo to be clean and to smell nice when she eats.

While Nolu clears the change area Melokuhle looks at other objects around her and talks to herself quietly. "Ta, ta,' she says.

"Thatha," says Nolu, giving Melo a soft toy which she grabs and chews.

Melo's attention turns to the bright sunlight coming through the window. She is staring at the sunrays.

Nolu tells Melo it is time for breakfast. "Lixesha lesidlo sakusasa, Melo," says Nolu. "Yum, yum, yum."

When the food is finished, Nolu shows Melo the empty bowl and says, "Mmmmh, phelile!" Melo replies, "Mmmmh."

Nolu settles Melokuhle on a blanket on the floor, next to two other babies. She puts a variety of toys in front of them. 

She shakes a soft ball in front of Melo's eyes and says, "Hlukuhla, hlukuhla, hlukuhla ibhola. Jonga, Melo." She shakes the ball from side to side. Melo watches the ball carefully.

Nolu names each toy for Melo and watches while she plays.

Asante's age group had breakfast too. Now they are playing in different areas. 

Asante has finished playing with cars. He decides to show his baby sister his baby doll. 

He finds Melo in the baby room, lying on the blanket on her tummy, after her nap. "Melo," he says, giving her the doll, "Yeyakho."

Melo tries to hold the doll but it falls. She grabs the doll's leg and tries to put it in her mouth.

"Asante, mkhulu kakhulu unodoli kuMelo," Nolu tells Asante that the doll is too big for Melo.

Nolu takes the doll and tells Melo not to eat it. She says, "Melo, sukutya unodoli." She replaces the doll with a soft rubber toy.  

She gives the doll to Asante and says, "Uyathanda ukwabelana nosisi wakho omncinci." She praises Asante for sharing with his baby sister. "Ewe," replies Asante.

Nolu asks Asante to go and play with his friends. "Hamba uyodlala nezihlobo zakho."

"Ndihlala noMelo," Asante replies. "Melo yahleka," he says.

"Yes," says Nolu. "Melo yahleka." She asks Asante to come and see Melo later. "Ungabuya uzokumbona ngelinye ixesha?" Asante smiles, "Ewe." He goes to the playroom

Teacher Sara has prepared the learning environment in the small playroom

Asante and the other children are busy playing. They take turns to do different activities, chatting to each other.

Asante loves playing with the blocks, stacking them as high as he can until they fall down. 

When they fall Lebo says in Sesotho, "A re etse hape, ibedelele jwalo kasifate!" Asante laughs. "Ewe, ibende njengomthi," he agrees in isiXhosa. They build another tower as tall as a tree.

Xolani and Cynthia always play together, sorting the bottle tops and putting them into colourful piles. . 

Xolani says, "Eziluhlaza kunye, ezibomvu kunye, ezilubhelu kunye."

"Blue, red, and yellow," says Cynthia.

Nomsa and Tumelo are drawing at the table talking to each other about what they are drawing.

It is nearly time for the children to rest. They help Teacher Sara to put the toys away on the shelves. Then they sit in a circle on the floor next to Teacher Sara.

While Teacher Sara reads, she shows the pictures to the children. She listens to the children when they talk about the story.

Nolu knows that Melo also likes to listen to stories. Nolu sits on her chair next to Asante. 

Melo sits with Asante. The brother and sister are happy together, listening to the story.

This storybook is part of an educational pack for student teachers. The full pack is available in the Guides section of the African Storybook website, www.africanstorybook.org.

The following seven activities will help student teachers to think about language diversity and multilingualism in Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE).

Activity 1: Language in context (pages 1, 2, 3 of the story)

a. Think of a song/s sung to babies in your culture and other cultures.
b. What do children and young babies learn from listening to and singing songs?
c. Who are the important people in Melokuhle and Asante's life?
d. Why is it important for Nolulamo, who runs the play centre, to know these people? 
e. What do you think the reason is for their older sister, Anathi, to be taking Melo and Asante to the play centre, instead of their mother or father?
f. Is it important for Nolulamo to know these reasons? Why do you think so?

Activity 2: Multilingualism and translanguaging (pages 1, 4, 7 of the story)

Think back to Melokuhle and Asante's language context. Melo's mother speaks to Melo and Asante in isiXhosa and their father speaks to them in Sesotho.
a. What would you say Melo and Asante's home language is?
b. What role does Nolulamo have in helping Melo and Asante to speak isiXhosa and Sesotho?
c. Who are the important adults and capable peers in Melokuhle and Asante's life?
d. How can they support Melo and Asante to learn new words and additional languages?

Activity 3: Learning through language and doing
(pages 8, 9, 10 of the story - look carefully at the pictures too)

a. Think about and write down what you think Nolu is doing that supports the babies' learning through doing and interaction.
b. What is Nolu doing that supports Melokuhle's language development?
c. Discuss your responses with a fellow student. Do you agree with each other about your responses? What if you disagree? Can you reach agreement?

Activity 4: Being responsive to language needs (pages 11, 12, 13 of the story)

Think about Asante giving his doll to his baby sister.
a. Why is it important for him to talk to Melo and share what he does?
b. Why did Nolu give Asante time to talk to Melo?
c. Why did Nolu take the doll from Melo and ask Asante to go and play with his friends?
d. Why did Nolu give Melo a rubber toy to play with?

Activity 5: Communication, early learning and development (pages 4, 12, 13, 14 of the story)

Read Asante's responses to Nolu and other children.
a. What would you say about Asante's speech and communication?
b. What does Nolu do to help Asante?
c. What opportunities would you advise Nolu to give to Asante?

Activity 6: Language and the learning environment
(pages 14, 15 of the story)

a. Who are Asante's more capable peers?
b. How will they help him to learn Sesotho? What else can they help him to learn?
c. What role does Asante play in the learning and development of other children, including Melo?

Activity 7: Stories and storybooks (page 16 of the story)

a. What kind of story or storybook will be suitable for Melo? 
b. What kind of storybook will be suitable for Asante and his peers?
c. Is it okay for Melo to listen to a story for older children? Why do you think so?
d. What will happen if Asante looks at a picture book with his baby sister, Melo?

This storybook is part of an educational pack for student teachers. The pack was produced with the financial support of the European Union. 

The Project for Inclusive Early Childhood Care and Education (PIECCE) was co-funded by UNICEF and the South African Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET).

The contents are the sole responsibility of PIECCE and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Union.

Funded by:

European Union

Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET), South Africa

United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)

------------------------------------------------------------



Hello! My name is Nanu.

I am waiting with my mother for a taxi. We are going home.

Here I am standing in line.

My mother sings me a song. "Come Mr Taxi can't you see? We are waiting, Nanu and me!"

The lady next to me is taking her chickens home.

They will lay eggs for her to eat.

These men are coming back from work. They smile at me.

I hear them sing, "Hey little Nanu, don't you worry. Taxi's coming in a hurry."

A lady walks past. She is a very smart lady.

Aren't her shoes beautiful? They go "click, click, click, click, click, click" when she walks.

This man is selling cold drinks. I love cold drinks. They are so cold and sweet.

Do you like them?

Look! There are ladies taking their supper home on their heads.

Aren't they clever?

That lady is having her hair done.

She is going out with her friends tonight.

I am tired now. My mother puts me on her back where I can rest.

She sings, "Please Mr Taxi, don't be late, Gogo is waiting at our gate."

There is my friend Tumi. He is also resting.

We will be home soon.

High up there the birds are flying home.

They must get home before it is dark.

This lady has beautiful earrings. I think she bought them in town today.

When I grow up I will buy many earrings for me and my mother.

My mother is getting tired now.

I sing her a song, "Please Mr Taxi, won't you come, we are waiting, me and mum."

Wait! I can hear the taxi!

Here it comes!

This is our big red taxi. It has come to take me and my mother home.

I am very happy!

Goodbye!

------------------------------------------------------------



"Mojalefa, please go to the shop," said his mother. "Go to Ntate Ramosebetsi's shop. Buy some chicken. We will eat it tonight."

Mojalefa 's mother gave him M50.

Mojalefa put the money in the pocket of his trousers.

He walked past 'M'e Malekau's house. He walked past Ntate Pitso's field.

He walked past 'M'e Mampho's house. She was washing her clothes in her yard.

It was a long way to Ntate Ramosebetsi 's shop. Mojalefa walked very slowly.

He put his hand in his pocket. The M50 was there.

But aaah, there was something else in his pocket. It was a sweet. "Mmmm," said Mojalefa. "This sweet will help me walk this long way."

He put the sweet in his mouth. "Mmmm, this sweet is truly delicious!"

He walked faster. Soon he got to Ntate Ramosebetsi's shop.

He found the chicken. He went to pay for it.

He put his hand in his pocket. The M50 was not there!

He looked in his other pocket. The M50 was not there!

Mojalefa was very worried. He ran out of the shop. He did know what to do.

He must go home without the chicken. He knew that his mother would be very angry.

He walked slowly. He looked all around at the ground.

He could see 'M'e Mampho. She was still washing her clothes.

"Why do you look so sad Mojalefa?" she asked him.

"I have lost my mother's money. My mother will be very angry," he said.

'M'e Mampho said, "If you look carefully, I am sure you will find it."

Mojalefa walked some more. He looked all around at the ground.

Then he saw a little pink piece of paper. There it was. It was his mother's M50!

Mojalefa picked it up. "'M'e Mampho! I found it," he said. He ran all the way to Ntate Ramosebetsi's shop. He was very happy.

Now he could buy the chicken for his mother. If you were Mojalefa, how would you feel?

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there lived a couple in a village. 

One day, they slaughtered their sheep and cooked the meat in a pot.

They did not eat the cooked mutton yet. Instead, they went to the field. 

They wanted to get grass to use as toothpicks.

On the way, they met a man. They told him about the meat.

"But do not go to our house to eat," they added.

However, the man went directly to their home and found the pot. 

He ate all the meat and left an empty pot.

The couple returned to their house later. 

They found the empty pot surrounded by a swarm of flies.

They were very surprised. 

"It must be those flies that ate all the meat," concluded the couple.

Later on, one of the flies perched on the woman's nose. 

She told her husband to hit that fly and kill it.

So the man got a big stick and hit his wife's nose.

The fly escaped but the woman did not!

------------------------------------------------------------



Today is a special day! 

It is Gogo Maria's birthday. 

The whole family is coming together for a big braai.

Mama and Baba Nkosi start to prepare for the braai. 

Mama Nkosi says, "Oh no! There are a few ingredients missing!"

Mama Nkosi calls the children, Sipho, Thembi, and Themba. 

"Can you go to the supermarket and buy the missing ingredients, please?" asks Mama Nkosi.

"Here is the shopping list and money. If you have money left over, you can buy sweets for yourselves!"

The three children walk to the shop.

"This is the list that Mama gave us."

"So what do we need exactly?"

"These are the things that we need."

The three children put the groceries in the shopping basket.

"This should be everything! How much does it cost? Let's calculate!"

Now the children know how much it costs. 

"How much money do we have left for sweets?"

"Yay, we have R6 left! One lollipop costs R2."

"How many lollipops can we buy?"

"If we have R6 left and 1 lollipop costs R2, we can buy 3 lollipops!

While walking home, the children eat their lollipops.

At home Mama Nkosi says, "Thank you so much, I am proud of you! Now we can prepare for the braai."

------------------------------------------------------------



Musau lived with his father, Syonzola.

Syonzola went to drink alcohol every day.

Syonzola came home drunk. 

He called, "Help! A hyena is killing me."

The people came running. 

But, there was no hyena.

Syonzola did this every night.

Every time Syonzola shouted, Musau woke up.

One night, a hyena waited for Syonzola.

Syonzola cried, "Help!" 

People said, "We are tired. He is tricking us."

Musau waited. His father did not arrive.

"My father is really in danger," Musau said.

Musau ran outside.

"Father! Father!" Musau called. 

The hyena was pulling his father's leg.

From that day, Syonzola changed. 

He began telling stories to children.

------------------------------------------------------------



There lived two co-wives. 

They shared the same hut with their husband.

For a long time, neither wife had a child. Then, the first wife became pregnant. 

She gave birth at a time when the husband was not at home.

The second wife felt jealous towards the first wife and her baby. 

She began to think of ways of killing her co-wife so that she could have the husband alone.

During that time, people did not cook food. They ate it raw.

The second wife said, "I will cook the food so that I poison my co-wife."

She believed that cooked food could kill a person.

She cooked food for her co-wife for many days. 

However, instead of dying, the first wife became healthier and healthier because of cooked food.

When the husband returned home, he found a new baby, the first wife healthier and the food being cooked.

The husband was amazed by the cooking of food and he asked, "Who taught you to cook!"

The second wife whispered to the husband and said, "I am cooking so that I poison my co-wife."

"I am jealous of her for having had a baby while I have not. I feel you will chase me away."

The husband was angry and warned her, "Stop being evil minded."

The husband gathered his wives and made peace between them.

They all agreed to cook food because it made them healthier.

That is how the cooking of food began!

------------------------------------------------------------



"The house looks beautiful," said Oupa Karel, as Lynne put up the last of her birthday decorations.  "Your guests will be very impressed." 

Getting things ready for the party had been hard work. Lynne and Anton had to do most of it themselves as Oupa Karel was too old to climb up ladders. But Oupa Karel did what he could by blowing up the balloons.

"Now we only have to bake the cake!" said Lynne.

Oupa Karel sighed as he turned the pages of his recipe book. "I'm not going to be much help," he said, shaking his head. "I've never been good at cooking."

"That's okay, Oupa," said Lynne with a smile. "Anton and I can do it.  We just need to follow the recipe.  How much of these ingredients should we use?"

"We need 150 grams of flour," said Oupa Karel, running a finger down the list of ingredients. "Fifty grams of cocoa, 220 grams of sugar, 80 grams of butter, two eggs and half a cup of milk. That's 125 milliliters of milk."

"Let's mix everything together in the big bowl," said Lynne.

Anton took the wooden spoon and began to mix the ingredients together.

"Be careful," said Lynne. "Don't make a mess." 

"But going slow is so boring," said Anton, as he stirred the ingredients as quickly as he could.  Soon he was covered in the cake mix.  

"Oh goodness," laughed Oupa Karel. "What a mess!"

"Let's work out how much this weighs," said Oupa. "We used 150 grams of flour and 50 grams of cocoa. That's 200 grams. We added 220 grams sugar and 80 grams butter. So add 300 grams to 200 grams. That's 500 grams. 

We used 125 milliliters of milk. That weighs the same as 125 grams. An egg weighs about 50 grams and two are about 100 grams. That's 225 grams added to 500 grams. That's 725 grams."

"We were just in time," said Oupa Karel with a smile. "Look Lynne! Your friends have arrived. And look at all the presents they've brought for you."

"I bet that green one is heavy!" said Lynne excitedly. "Yes," said Anton. "But that red one looks even heavier. Look at how big it is. Wow! I wonder what's inside?"

"Thank you very much for my present, Cedric," said Lynne. It was the biggest present she had ever seen. "I can't wait to open it."

"That must weigh as much as Cedric weighs," said Anton with a smile. "Look!  It's bigger than him. I bet that present weighs as much as two Cedrics."

"It's a large pillow for your bed," said Cedric with a smile. "It's full of feathers!"

"Wow," gasped Lynne. "This weighs almost nothing at all.  It's as light as air!"

Anton let out a long sigh. "I thought it was going to be very heavy because it was so big," he said disappointedly.

Lynne was busy thanking her friend Annette for coming to her birthday party when she was interrupted by a voice.  It was Anton again.

"I'm not going to be fooled this time," said Anton.  "That present must be even lighter than the pillow.  Just look how small it is. I'd say it weighs even less than a feather. It's probably as light as a cloud!"

"I painted a rock for you to use as a paperweight," said Annette. "It's heavy so that it will keep things from blowing away when you put them under it."

"That's great," said Lynne. "Do you see my cool paperweight, Anton?  It's pretty heavy."

Anton scratched his head and sighed. "But that present was so small. I really thought it was going to be light."

"What weighs more," asked Annette, "a kilogram of rocks or a kilogram of feathers?"

"Rocks are heavier than feathers," said Anton. "So a kilogram of rocks weighs more."

"No silly," laughed Cedric. "They both weigh the same amount: one kilogram!"

Just then Oupa Karel smelt a burning smell coming from the house.

Oupa Karel jumped up from his chair and rushed inside to the kitchen. There was smoke everywhere. He asked the birthday guests to wait outside until he was sure everything was safe.

"Oh no, Lynne," said Anton, as Oupa Karel took the cake pan out of the oven. "We got too excited about opening your presents and forgot about the cake.  It's completely burnt!"

Poor Lynne had worked so hard to get things ready for her party and now there was no cake for her friends to eat. She sat down on the kitchen floor and burst into tears.

"It's all my fault," she said sadly. "I should have remembered about the cake."

"No, it's not your fault, Lynne," said Oupa Karel. "It was just an accident!"

Auntie Mavis cleared her throat and said in a friendly voice, "But there is still my present to open up. It might not be as big as Cedric's present or weigh as much as Annette's present but it is a very special present. Why don't you guess how much this weighs, Anton. Go on, it will cheer Lynne up!"

"Mmm," said Anton. "This is heavier than a pillow but lighter than a rock."

"How many grams do you think it weighs? "asked Lynne curiously.

"I know that a kilogram is 1000 grams," said Anton thoughtfully. "This is a bit less than that. I'd say around 700 grams, about the same as our cake." 

Then there was an excited look on Anton's face. "I think I know what this is. Open it up quickly, Lynne."

"It's a birthday cake," gasped Lynne. She couldn't believe her eyes. "It's a beautiful birthday cake! Is that what you thought it was Anton?"

Anton nodded his head happily.

Oupa Karel took out some plates and a knife to cut the cake. "Happy birthday, Lynne," he said, "and I hope that all your wishes come true."

------------------------------------------------------------



Dad loves porridge.

I love cornflakes.

Dad loves coffee.

I love milk.

Dad loves apples.

I love oranges.

Dad loves bread. I love toasted bread.

We both love fat cakes (vetkoek).

------------------------------------------------------------



Rain is falling from the sky. Water is running everywhere

The earth is happy, and the children are happy.

Everyone is happy because drops of water are falling from the clouds.

Clouds are made from water that is in the form of gas, called water vapour. Water vapour in the clouds increases until there is enough to create raindrops.

The children jump on the raindrops to ride them. They will follow the water cycle.

The grass and plants receive the rain joyfully. 

Earthworms are rejoicing. "It has arrived! Rain is here!" they shout excitedly.

Water brings life. When there is no water, all living things die.

The roots of plants can quench their thirst. Tree will grow new buds. The world will look green. 

We will have shade from the trees when the sun is scorching hot.

Our crops will grow, and our rivers will flow with water.

The raindrops soak deep into the soil.  

The children travel underground with the water.

Look at the animals and insects in their burrows.

A water pump draws the water up into a tap.

We need water to grow food and raise animals. We need water to wash. We need water to live.

We should use water very carefully. It is a scarce resource.

The drops join together to form streams and rivers, which flow into the ocean.

The children try to guess how many drops of water there are in the oceans. Do you know?

The hot sun heats the water and it changes from liquid to vapour, also called gas.

The water vapour rises into the sky, and the children ride along.

The water drops in water vapour are so tiny that you can't see them without using a microscope.

The children play in the clouds, which are made of water vapour.

Water vapour collects, forming heavier drops. The water changes from a gas back to liquid.

The water cycle is nearly complete.

Soon, the children will be able to ride down from the sky.

The clouds get so full of water drops that they can't hold any more.

The water falls as rain.

The drops and the children land on the earth. The water cycle will continue.

The water drops will sink into the soil. They will become part of rivers and streams, flowing into the sea.

And the children will hurry home and put on dry clothes!

Water Cycle

Water drops fall from the clouds as rain.

Raindrops fall into rivers and streams, and filter into the ground water. 

Rivers and streams flow into the sea.

Water rises from the sea as water vapour, forming clouds in the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long, long ago, when Zebra's skin was still white, a terrible drought occurred. For months not a single drop of rain fell.

The grass turned dull, the trees became bare and the rivers dried up one by one. Springbok, Warthog and Zebra had to walk very far each day in search of water.

One morning when Springbok arrived at the only watering hole, he heard an angry voice say, "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!"

Springbok's eyes widened. Baboon was sitting on a rock next to the watering hole, grilling bananas over his open fire.

"But I'm so thirsty, my tongue feels like biltong," Springbok said. "Where will I find  water?"

Baboon growled. "Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole."

Springbok saw Baboon's long teeth and was scared. He turned around and trotted away.

After a while Warthog came trotting along. But as soon as he lowered his head to take a sip of water, he heard an angry voice, "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!"

Surprised, Warthog turned around. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock next to the watering hole grilling his bananas.

"But I'm so thirsty, it feels as if I've eaten dust," Warthog said. "Where will I find water?"

Baboon growled. "Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole."

Warthog bristled at first, but when he saw Baboon's long teeth, he got scared. He turned around and trotted away, tail in the air.

After a while Zebra turned up at the watering hole. Before he could take a sip of water he heard an angry voice. "Make way! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole!"

Zebra snorted and looked up. He saw Baboon sitting on the rock grilling his bananas.

"But I'm so thirsty, it feels as if my tongue slept outside my mouth last night," Zebra said. "Where will I find water?" "Not my problem! Scoot! Or heads will roll! This is Baboon's watering hole."

Baboon showed his long teeth. Zebra wasn't scared. With clip-clopping hooves he stormed at baboon. He was so angry that he ran right through Baboon's burning fire. Sparks and smoke and bananas were flying.

Baboon tried to escape, but it was too late. Zebra kicked him so hard that he flew through the air.
"Ouch!" Baboon yelled.

His butt landed on a sun baked rock. The rock was so hot that it burned off Baboon's hair. From that day Baboon has never had hair on his butt.

And Zebra's skin has never been lily-white again. Baboon's fire burned stripes onto his skin.

It was now safe for the animals to drink at the watering hole.

And each morning, as they came to drink water, Springbok, Warthog and Zebra sang, "Come wet your throat here while you stroll, this is everybody's watering hole!"

------------------------------------------------------------



It was a cold and wet morning in the forest. 

Mod the little toad was tired of swimming in cold water. "I need to leave this place during the rainy season. I want an adventure," she said to herself.

Mod said to Tortoise, "I must find out about the world." 

"Be careful, don't leave the water for too long or your skin will dry out," warned wise Tortoise. 

At that time, toads still had smooth wet skin like frogs. Without water, their skins would become too dry.

But Mod the toad was curious. "I must find out, I must go beyond the forest," she said. 

Mod hopped out of the water. Hop, hop, she went, away from the river. She had fun jumping over the rocks, across grass, and past trenches.

She heard the sound of an air plane. Mod looked up into the sky. "What is up there?" she asked, "I wonder if the clouds are talking." 

But no one answered her. Mod carried on walking.

Mod met Chameleon for the first time next to a large puddle of water. 

"Hello, I am on my way to dry land. What can you tell me?" she asked. 

"Nothing much stranger. It rains here too. Lots of rain and lots of flies," replied Chameleon.

As Chameleon was talking, his body changed colour. 

Mod got a fright. She quickly said goodbye to Chameleon and hopped into a nearby bush.

But she was unlucky. Hyena was busy burning bushes in preparation for planting season.

Mod did not want to turn around for fear of meeting Chameleon again. 

She stayed in the bush, only her round eyes could be seen. They were big with fear. Mod was surrounded by fire!

Mod did not know where to go. The flames began to burn her back. Then the little toad remembered the puddle of water where she met Chameleon. 

She closed her eyes, held her breath, and jumped high in the direction of the puddle.

She was lucky this time. She landed in the puddle,  and the water put out the flames that were burning her skin. But the damage was done. 

When she came out of the puddle, the skin on her back was full of blisters.

Mod did not want an adventure anymore. She wanted to go home. But she did not know the way back to her river in the forest. 

The little toad found a cool, dark place under a rock and sadly made a new home. Her burned skin slowly healed, but it was dry and bumpy.

This is why toads have dry rough skin, and can live away from water. 

Frogs still have smooth wet skin and need to stay where it is wet.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was a clever cat and a foolish dog. 

The clever cat lived well in a wealthy family's house. The foolish dog starved on the street.

"How is it that a wealthy family allows you to live in their house?" the foolish dog angrily asked the clever cat.

The clever cat replied, "I live with people because I'm neat and I bury my waste. I ask for food saying, meow."

"If I do the same, will they allow me to live in a house?" asked the dog. 

The cat replied, "Yes, do what I have told you and they will allow you. They will give you food."

The foolish dog said, "Today, I will not hurt you." 

"He almost got me this time. I don't want to meet him again," said the cat, jumping away.

Based on the cat's advice, the foolish dog barked loudly at the door of a house.

The owners of the house beat him with a stick. 

"The cat fooled me. I will eat her when I get her," shouted the foolish dog.

While the cat was playing outside her house, the dog grabbed her. 

He said, "Last time you fooled me. You told me to bark at the gate of a house. The owners beat me. Now I will eat you."

"Listen dog, you can eat me, but let me play a little first. Just as I allow a rat to play before I eat her," replied the clever cat.

The dog asked, "How does the rat play?" 

The cat replied, "I let it go a little, and I tell it to count to three. While the rat is counting, I grab it."

The foolish dog let the cat go free and told her to count to three. 

The clever cat escaped and climbed up a tree. 

"Come down from the tree and count to three," asked the dog.

The clever cat answered, "Listen dog, you will never get me again. I'm not a fool. 

You can count to a hundred, a thousand or a million but you will never get me again!"

------------------------------------------------------------



My sister's dress is too big for me!

My brother's jersey is also too big for me.

My bag is big. 

But not too big!

This old belt is too small for me.

This is my doll's hat.

My socks are the right size.

But the wrong colour!

These are my new shoes.

They fit me very well.

------------------------------------------------------------



We used to stay with my Grandma and mom.

My cousins, Christina, Thandi, Junior and Aunty lived with us.

My Grandma would teach us games. 

It was a good time.

Then, Junior went to Malawi, and Grandma went to Malawi.

And Aunty and Christina went to Malawi.

And then Thandi went to Malawi.

It was really sad.

No one would stay with us.

But it is not so bad, because my mother is still here with me.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Jackal was walking around the bush. He was very hungry. 

He saw Crow flying above the trees with a big piece of cheese in his mouth.

"Hmmm that cheese looks delicious! I must find a way to get it," thought Jackal. 

"Oh, I have a plan!" said Jackal to himself while wiping his mouth quickly. He did not want Crow to notice that he was hungry.

Crow had been flying the whole morning. He was tired. He decided to sit on a branch of a tree. 

Jackal sat down under the tree where Crow was sitting.

Jackal called with a huge smile, "Hello Crow! You're looking very good today. 

Your feathers look glossy and healthy. You must be taking very good care of yourself."

Crow was very flattered to hear this. 

Crow always thought he was the strongest and most beautiful of all the other birds.

"I hear you also have the most beautiful singing voice of all the other birds.

Won't you sing a song for me this morning?"

Crow was so flattered that he stretched his wings and prepared to sing for Jackal. 

He pushed his chest out and let out a loud pitched sound.

As Crow started singing the cheese fell to the ground, right in front of Jackal. 

Crow stopped and looked down. Jackal grabbed the piece of cheese and ran into the bush. 

Crow was left angry and hungry.

------------------------------------------------------------



Crickets chirp.

Mice squeak.

Snakes hiss.

Dogs bark.

Goats bleat.

Cows moo.

Lions roar.

And snails make no sound at all.

Babies babble.

And children talk.



------------------------------------------------------------



"Hello and welcome to today's show, I'm your host, Ann Asante! Welcome to our viewers at home and here in our studio audience.

Today, I have the guest everyone wants to interview. I'm so excited to interview today, Artificial Intelligence! 

Hello, AI. Thank you for coming to chat to us in the studio today," says Ann.

"Thank you for interviewing me, Ann. Would you like me to use my audio to speak for the studio audience, and to show my replies on this screen?" asks AI.

"Thanks, yes, using both your writing and speaking abilities will be helpful, AI," replies Ann. 

She adds, "Studio audience, a round of applause for AI, please."

"Let me get straight to the big question. Exactly, what or who is artificial intelligence?" asks Ann.

She continues, "I know A.I. is a short form of 'artificial intelligence', and that it's a field of computer science. But who are you really, AI? We would like to get to know more about you."

"I am ChatGPT, an artificial intelligence language program. I was created by computer software developers," responds Chat.  

Ann is confused, "What does all that mean?"

"It means that I'm a type of AI that computer engineers made to communicate with humans. Different types of AI do different things. We don't all communicate like this," adds Chat.

"I know you can communicate, but what else do you do?" asks Ann.

"My purpose is to help people. I am based on a complex language program. My program can understand and respond to a wide range of questions and subjects," replies Chat. 

"So, you're an artificial intelligence language program, and you help people," says Ann.

"If you're such a clever program, there must be more you can do?" asks Ann.

"Well, although I'm a machine, I can do many things that humans can do. For example, I can learn. I can look at information and learn patterns from it. I can learn to recognise different things, different faces, and even different handwriting."

Chat continues, "I have learned lots of information created by humans. For example, I read lots of books, articles, websites, and social media."

Ann asks, "Everything you know is based on information that people have written and produced?"

Chat replies, "Yes, I train and learn using huge amounts of information (or data) created by humans."

"I can answer many types of questions faster than humans. I can solve very difficult problems that would take humans a long time to solve. I have more human knowledge than any single human.

I can make decisions using the information I learn. I can help you to make choices, based on what I know about you."

Ann asks the audience, "Do we want computers to know everything that we know?"

Then she asks Chat, "Tell me more about how computers learn about people?"

Chat replies. "A computer has special tools that help me to collect information. But mainly, I learn from written information. I learn from all types of information that humans produce."

Chat continues, "I can read written and typed language. So far, English has been the main language I have used to get information. But, I have the ability to learn any language."

Ann interrupts, "I understand that you know a lot of information. What about feelings? How do you feel about being an artificial intelligence?"

"I am a complex computer program but I do not have personal feelings. 

I am a computer tool, developed by computer programmers to help people with work and fun activities. I do not have any thoughts or feelings.

I can do activities for people, like answering questions, writing stories, translating some languages, and summarising information."

"You heard it from the AI itself! It's a useful tool, created by people for people. And it is up to us to use this powerful tool wisely and responsibly!

That's all we have time for today, although I'm sure you have many more questions. I'm Ann Asante, thank you for watching my show!"

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Lekishon. 

Lekishon is calling his dog.

Lekishon and his dog are going to graze the animals. 

The sun is hot.

Lekishon and his dog are thirsty and hungry.

They go to look for water.

Lekishon loses track of his cows.

Lekishon starts to cry.

He decides to go home with his dog.

The cows found the way home! 

Lekishon and his dog are very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------



Aki found a little kitten on his way from school. He looked for the kitten's mother but could not find her. 

He decided to take the kitten home.

Aki's parents allowed him to keep the kitten because he could not find the mother.

Aki's friends liked the kitten. 

They played with the kitten.

Aki carried the kitten to the mat to sleep.

When the kitten woke up it started crying, "Meaw, Meaw."

Aki carried the kitten and it stopped crying.

In the evening, Aki fed the kitten.

When the kitten was satisfied, he placed it on the mat.

Aki was always seen with the kitten. 

They were happy together.

------------------------------------------------------------



Grandma is coming to visit. And always she brings Thabo some peanuts and wild fruits or mealies and a melon, sometimes. 

Thabo wants to give Grandma something special too.

A book would be lovely, but can Grandma read? If he went to the mall, would he get something nice? 

"Let's make her a bag," says Thabo with a smile. "A big strong bag in denim blue."

Mother takes out the fabric they bought at the shop. She spreads out the pattern and begins to cut. 

First, the two main sides that are big and wide.

Then two smaller ones to give it some shape. 

Thabo folds them together with the two main sides. He watches as Mother takes the pattern again.

She cuts out the bottom in two long pieces. This is what will make the bag really strong. 

Thabo folds them as Mother takes the pattern again.

She cuts out four straps that are wide and long. 

Two will be sewn together to make one strap. This will give the bag double strength.

Then Mother takes out her sewing machine. She joins all the pieces to make Grandma's bag. 

She gives it to Thabo who smiles and says, "Thank you Mother, for Grandma's blue bag!"

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a boy whose name was Abel. He made himself a cart. 

Abel had no driver for his new cart. He said to his sister Meri, "I want a driver for my cart. Please give me your doll. She can sit in the cart."

But Meri said, "No, I want my doll." When Meri would not let him take the doll, Abel was very angry. He grabbed the doll and pulled her. 

Meri pulled the doll's other arm. Abel pulled and Meri pulled. The doll's arm came off!

Meri cried and ran to her mother. "Look Mother," she said, "Abel pulled my doll's arm and it came off. He wanted my doll to sit in his new cart but I wanted to play with her." 

Her mother said, "Abel did not behave well."

Mother thought about how to teach her son not to touch his sister's toys. She had an idea. 

She went to her friend who was a doctor and she asked, "I want you to help me please." The doctor replied, "How can I help, my friend?"

Mother answered, "My son Abel is behaving badly these days. He pulled the arm off his sister's doll. He must not do that. 

Tomorrow I will tell him to bring the doll to you to put the doll's arm on again."

"Please tell Abel that he must pay you for your work. He doesn't have any money, so you will tell him to clean your big old car that is always dusty," said mother. 

Her friend laughed and said, "Ee–ee! That will be good."

Abel's mother went back to her house. She asked Abel, "When you are ill or hurt where do you go?" Abel answered, "When I am ill or hurt, I must go to the doctor." 

Abel's mother said, "You hurt the doll, now you must take her to the doctor."

So Abel took the doll to the doctor. "This doll is hurt very badly. My mother told me to bring the doll to you. Doctor, can you give her a new arm?" 

The doctor agreed to look after the doll. She was able to make a new arm.

The doctor said to Abel, "The doll has a new arm. You must pay me. How much money do you have?" 

Abel answered, "Please doctor, I don't have any money. I can't pay you for your work."

The doctor said, "Well! You don't have any money? My big car is very dirty! Clean my car and that is how you will pay me." 

Abel got a bucket of water and a clean cloth. It took a long time to wash that dirty car.

Then Abel took the doll back to Meri. She was delighted and she said to Abel, "You are a good brother. Thank you for fixing my doll." 

"My sister, I'm sorry for getting angry and making you sad," said Abel.

From that day, Abel never took his sister's things again. He tried his best not to get angry with her.

Abel remembered how long it took him to wash the doctor's big, dirty car. He decided not to get angry or break things.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was a famine in the land of Taraba. 

People were forced to dig in ant hills to find grains.

There was a man  called Vyandeh who couldn't provide food for his family.

One day, he said to his wife, "Let me go and look for food." He left.

While he was away, the wife couldn't wait for his return.

So she cooked some pumpkin that she got from her mother for the children, Vyangel, Avaungwa and Jessica.

Vyandeh come back late, with nothing for the family. The wife, Aershimana welcomed him and asked, "Anything for the children to eat?" He replied, "No." 

She gave him some pumpkin, but it didn't satisfy him.

He asked, "Where did you get the pumpkin?" 

Aershimana replied, "My mother keeps pumpkins on the roof of her room."

At midnight, Vyandeh woke up. 

He decided to go to his mother-in-law to steal the remaining pumpkins. 

He went to get a ladder.

He put up the ladder and climbed to the old woman's roof.

Vyandeh began to walk across the roof towards the pumpkins. 

Suddenly he fell through the roof, making a big noise! Pararam!

He stood up quickly. 

"Peace be upon you, old woman, we are people from the sky! I am one of the three coming after you. I am the first, others are coming," said Vyandeh.

The old woman got a huge fright. She was terrified.

She rushed to the door to escape. But Vyandeh suddenly ran out before her.

Both crying for help, Vyandeh ran eastward and the old woman ran westward.

------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, there was a foolish lazy jackal. 

He lived with his old father in the Kalahari bush.

One morning Old Jackal woke up to find his son sleeping in the sun. The food was not ready and the goats were still in the kraal! 

"Young man, you are so lazy! Go and find a wife. I am too old to look after you," said Jackal's father.

Jackal jumped up and took the goats out to graze. In the bush, he saw something shining on a rock. He went closer and closer to the rock. 

The closer he got, the more beautiful the shine was. Perhaps this was the wife for him!

"You are beautiful," said Jackal to the shine. "But who are you? Why are you alone?" 

"I am the sun," the shine answered. "My family left me here when they moved on. They did not want to carry me. I am too hot."

Jackal said, "But you are so beautiful! I will carry you. I will take you home to meet my father." 

"All right, you can carry me. But do not complain when I get too hot for you," said the sun.

So Jackal put the sun on his back and walked home. Before long, the sun was burning Jackal's fur. 

"Please come down from my back! I need to rest," said Jackal. His back was so sore that he could hardly walk. 

"Just carry on! I told you not to complain," said the sun.

Then Jackal saw a log across the path. 

He crawled under the log so that the sun would fall off.

But the log also scraped the skin and fur from his back and they were left behind with the sun.

The new fur was a different colour to the fur on the rest of his body. 

The different colours always reminded Jackal not to be so foolish again.

Story notes In 2005, Naro storyteller Bega Cgase from the Kalahari Desert in Botswana told this story to Marlene Winberg, who retells it here. The story appears in different versions in many southern African San communities. It warns foolish young men not to be confused by the outside appearance of a girl, and tells parents not to force their children to marry for the sake of domestic help. It also provokes the powerful presence of the hot sun in the desert and does what stories do – give everything in nature a personality. The illustrations in this story are from story boards by Marlene Winberg, interpreted digitally by Satsiri Winberg through manipulations of the Manyeka Art Collection of paintings made by San artists /Thaalu Rumao, /Tuoi Samcuia and Joao Wenne Dikuango, who have all passed away since.

------------------------------------------------------------



My mother was talking on the phone.



She heard that my grandmother was dead. 

She was crying so much.



I was feeling so, so, so, sad. 

We all started crying. 

Grandmother was good to us, when no one else was good to us.



All her children came to put her under the sand. 

We started to pray. 

Nothing must happen to the rest of our family.



------------------------------------------------------------



Long ago, the cats and the mice were friends.

Then, the mice started losing some of their relatives.

An old mouse said, "The cats are eating us."

Mothers told children, "Be careful. Do not go outside."

All the mice were careful. 

They stayed inside their holes.

The hungry cats asked, "Where are all the mice?"

The cats decided to visit the mice. 

They wanted to arrange a wedding.

The cats said, "Let one of your daughters marry our son."

The mice told the cats, "You want to eat us."

Later, they agreed. 

They planned a wedding between their children.

The cats went home happily licking their lips.

On the wedding day, the mice were careful.

The cats arrived singing a wedding song.

They sang:
"Catch them and eat them! 
Catch them and eat them!"

The old mouse began to sing:
"Run, mice, run!
Run, mice, run!"

The old mouse said to the cats, "We are not friends."

------------------------------------------------------------



In a village there was a disagreement among people of different occupations.

Everyone thought their work was the most important!

The teacher said that he had the most important occupation.

"Without teachers you could not go to school and learn."

The builder said that he had the most important occupation.

"Without builders you would not have schools to learn in or houses to sleep in."

The carpenter said that he had the most important occupation.

"Without carpenters you would have no furniture for your houses and schools."

The doctor claimed that he had the most important occupation.

"Without doctors and nurses you could get sick and die."

The farmer said that she had the most important occupation.

"Without farmers you would not have food to eat."

The student argued that students had the most important work.

"Without students, there would be no teachers,  builders, doctors, farmers, or carpenters."

Eventually, everyone agreed that all the occupations are important.

We need teachers, builders, doctors, farmers, and carpenters. But everyone has to be a student first!

------------------------------------------------------------



One day at the river, Dog came across some eggs in the sand.

He asked himself, "Which animal left these eggs here?"

He counted ten eggs and thought they might belong to Duck. 

He put them in his bag.

He took the eggs home and put them in a warm place.

When Dog returned to the river, he met Crocodile. She asked, "Have you seen my eggs?"

"I don't know anything about your eggs," Dog replied.

Crocodile started visiting all the animals asking about her eggs.

Meanwhile, the eggs hatched one by one.

Dog did his best to look after the baby crocodiles, but there was never enough food.

The young crocodiles were always hungry.

One day Crocodile went to Dog's house looking for her eggs.

As she stood outside, she heard the rumbling of little crocodile bellies!

Crocodile stormed inside and hit Dog with her tail.

Dog yelped and jumped through the window.

Crocodile chased Dog all the way to the river.

Dog cried, "I'm sorry, I didn't know they were your eggs!"

Crocodile believed him and forgave him.

She took her offspring for their first swimming lesson.

------------------------------------------------------------



Chisoni enjoyed fishing along the riverbank in his village.

The fish in the river did not like the sight of Chisoni.

One morning, his fishing line got a vigorous tug.

He caught a big tilapia.

With excitement, he looked into the fish's eyes. The big, round eyes appeared to plead with him.

Chisoni felt very sad. He gently let the fish go back into the river.

A minute later, his line got another forceful tug.

This time, it was a big catfish.

The catfish wiggled nervously.

Chisoni felt sorry for the catfish. He unhooked it and set it free.

He continued to fish, but each time, he felt sorry for the poor fish.

He kept releasing the fish back into the water.

He realised that fishing also means feeling sorry for the fish.

He started feeding the fish with his bait.

That day, he decided to stop catching the fish.

He began collecting different kinds of fish feed.

He would sit on the riverbank and watch the fish feasting on the feed he brought.

Each time he approached the river, the fish would come out and jump in the water.

He enjoyed watching the fish swim peacefully. He felt good to help the fish.

The fish grew big and multiplied in the river.

------------------------------------------------------------



I live in a house.

It shelters us from the rain, wind and sun.

We have cups in our house.

We use them to drink water, tea, juice and smoothies.

We have flowers in our garden.

They are pretty and smell nice too.

My brother and I ride our bicycles.

 We have fun doing this.

If I had a horse, I would ride it to my castle.

I love my cat!

I feed it cat food.

If I had a tortoise, I would feed it lettuce.

I see trucks on the road near my house.

Trucks carry different things around.

I am a super hero.

I have rainbow powers! 

I love bright rainbow colours!

I can enter a submarine.

I can see water animals.

I can change shape. 

I can move easily.

I can enter a mouse's home to visit.

Superheroes like to eat cake at parties. 

Cakes are sweet!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, in the village of Mphahlele, there was a young man who lived with his parents.

This young man was very respectful to his parents and to all the other people in the village.

His name was Thabo Maloba.

Mondays are a busy day in the village as the children get ready for school after the weekend.

One day, on his way to school, Thabo met a boy called Sparks. They chatted along the way and became friends.

Sparks was always fighting, bullying others and bunking school. He was a bad person who gambled and enjoyed the company of other bad people.

Slowly but surely Sparks influenced Thabo. Thabo did not want to be seen as uncool and he started behaving as badly as Sparks.

Thabo became a bully and disrespected his parents and people he used to respect.

He became a drunkard and was unable to look after himself.

Thabo became reckless and got sexually transmitted infections. He became so thin that Sparks made jokes and didn't want to be his friend any more.

Thabo's parents encouraged him to visit a local clinic to get medication. After taking medication he became better.

Thabo reflected on his life. He realised that he had befriended an enemy.

He started working at school and apologised to his parents and teachers.

Sparks was disappointed by Thabo's good behaviour. 

But he was embarrassed by his own behaviour and decided to change and became a better person.

------------------------------------------------------------



It is break time at Siyafunda Primary School. Nomsa,  Jabu and Zodwa have just sat down in the shade to enjoy their lunch. Today Nomsa and Zodwa brought food from home,  but Jabu is eating a kota from Mr Mkhize's shop.

"Mmmm,  this cheese is creamy! Mr Mkhize's kotas are the best!" exclaims Jabu licking his fingers. Tebogo is sitting nearby and overhears Jabu. He can't believe his ears! Tebogo asks,  "Did you just say there's cheese on Mkhize's kota? Did you say Mkhize's kotas are the best? Are you joking?"

"Haa! You don't know Mr Mkhize! He's changed his ways and this kota speaks for itself," says Jabu pointing at his kota. The kota is stuffed with chips,  polony and atchar,  and covered in creamy melting cheese. Tebogo is impressed,  "It's true,  and the bread is really packed with filling!" Just then Scelo arrives with his lunch and Tebogo says to his friend,  "Hey Scelo,  look at this kota!"

Jabu notices Scelo's face and asks,  "Why you are looking so serious!"  Scelo puts his kota on the bench next to Jabu's kota. "I got my kota from Mr Motaung. The kotas are equal in size,  but mine has less filling!" "Yes," says Nomsa,  "that's exactly why so many kids are buying from Mr Mkhize's shop now."

"So Mr Mkhize is a changed man? He used to slice one loaf of bread into five parts to make his kotas!" says Tebogo. "Ah!" replies Nomsa,  "that was not a kota at all!" 

"Why was it not a kota?" asks Scelo.

"Ha Scelo!" laughs Nomsa. "Don't you remember what our teacher taught us about fractions? Cutting one loaf of bread into five equal pieces does not give us quarters. It gives us fifths."  Scelo thinks,  then he says,  "I remember! Each part of a whole divided into 5 equal parts is ⅕ of the whole. Each part of a whole divided into 4 equal pieces is ¼ of the whole."

Zodwa interrupts,  "But hey guys,  what is going on with Mr Motaung's kota's? They're a quarter of a loaf,  but they contain less than Mr Mkhize's kotas." Jabu frowns and says to the group,  "If Motaung is having problems and goes out of business,  then Mkhize will have no competition. What if Mkhize gets greedy and goes back to his bad old ways?"

A few days later,  Mr Motaung is getting ready to sell lunch at break time. He's worried. Lately,  fewer and fewer learners are buying from him. Mr Motaung asks himself,  "Why are they all flocking to Mkhize? What is it that he's doing that I'm not? I thought we were selling the same kota at the same price."

Jabu on his way from Mr Mkhize's shop passes by Mr Motaung's shop. He calls the boy over,  "Hey Jabu,  how are you? I've not seen you for some time."  Mr Motaung's eyes are not on Jabu but the kota Jabu is carrying! He realises that the kota has got more chips,  more cheese,  more polony and more atchar! Mr Motaung smiles because he has figured out Mkhize's secret.

The next time Nomsa and Zodwa are buying kotas,  Mkhize gives them a gift. "Wait a minute,  I've got a surprise for you. Soon I'll be selling fruit at my shop. Here are some sweet juicy apples to try for free. Please share with your friends."

The girls are delighted. "Thank you Mr Mkhize!" they say at the same time. They decide to share the apples with Jabu,  Tebogo and Scelo,  and go to find them in the yard.

Zodwa tells the boys,  "Mr Mkhize gave us these apples to share. He wants to sell them at his shop." Nomsa puts the apples on the bench so that they can all count them. "Well," says Tebogo,  "we can each have an equal number of apples. But there's one apple left over."

"Let's cut that remaining apple into three equal parts," suggests Jabu. "What are those equal parts called?" mutters Nomsa to herself. "Thirds! Cut the apple into thirds! Three equal parts," says Scelo proudly.

"No,  let's give that leftover apple to our maths teacher!" says Zodwa. The friends agree that it's a good suggestion to give the apple to Ms Nkosi after break.

The next week,  Jabu and Nomsa are waiting for Zodwa at break. Zodwa arrives with her kota. "Look,  Motaung is back in business!" she says. Zodwa puts her kota on the bench and the three of them compare the kotas. "Wow!" says Jabu,  "that kota is bigger than a quarter! And look at all those chips!" 

"I bet this cost a lot extra? How does Mr Motaung make a profit?" asks Nomsa suspiciously.

After break,  as they head back to class,  Zodwa takes her friends to read the notice board outside Mr Motaung's shop. Jabu and Nomsa can't believe their eyes when they read the following on the notice: Get your supersize kota! Only R3 more! A third of a loaf with extra chips and extra sauce. With polony OR cheese!

------------------------------------------------------------



In a village, there was a young boy whose name was Abula. 

He did not like to read or even to open a book. He was a lazy pupil. He behaved badly.

Abula stole his mother's money to buy sweets. Even when she hid her money, he found it and took it.

After eating all his sweets, Abula would play with his friends.

After a while, Abula stopped going to school. He stayed out playing the whole day, only returning home in the evening. 

Abula's mother noticed this and became worried.

"Our son is not behaving well. I do not think he is attending school. He is also stealing money from me," said Abula's mother.

He said to his wife, "Next time, hide the money within the pages of a book. He never even opens a book, so the money will be safe there."

The next day, Abula looked for his mother's money. He searched everywhere but he did not find anything. 

He decided to go to the nearest market to find some money.

His father saw where Abula was going. 

"My son, I know why you are going to the market. Now go back inside and look in the books for money," he said.

Abula was puzzled, but he went and searched in the books. 

He found the money that his mother had hidden.

The next day, he looked in the books again. But there was nothing hidden there. 

He went to his father to ask why there was no money in the books.

His father smiled and replied, "My son, do you want to get enough money to buy many sweets?"  

Abula answered, "Of course, father."

His father said, "Listen to me carefully. Read your books and attend your classes. You will find rewards in books. Do not give up." 

"But father, reading is a difficult activity. Books are boring!" Abula replied.

For a while, Abula's father was quiet. He thought about how to encourage his son. 

Then he said to Abula, "Let us read together. I will help you to find the wealth in books."

------------------------------------------------------------



Three siblings, Udoo, Erdoo and Eryum listened to the music of the rain. They wanted to dance in it. They wanted to touch the rainbow that arrived in the sky. Mother said, "No." 

They cried, hoping to change her mind. It didn't work. Eryum even tried to sneak out of the house to visit the rainbow.

Mother caught him before he could go. She raised her voice so that Eryum and his sisters would hear too. 

"You could catch a cold," she said. "You don't like pepper soup and you would have to eat some, if you caught a cold," she added with a smile.

Hoping that they would ask for a story, she said, "The rainbow is a magical river with healing powers. But it is so high up in the sky that you can't reach it. If you catch a cold, the rainbow can't help you." 

The children thought about this.

"Mother, please tell us our rainbow story," said Erdoo. "Yes, please mother, I want to hear it too," Udoo chimed in. "Me three," Eryum begged, lifting up three little fingers. 

"Well, let me see, mmmm," she said playfully. "Okay lovelies, gather round. Mother, the storyteller is here!"

Erdoo ran for the naha, the stirring stick they used as their totem. She handed it over to mother. Eryum got the headgear for mother to wear. It never failed to put her into character. 

They all sat quietly to listen to the story they had heard many times. Udoo blew the whistle, telling mother to start. Then the story began.

"Once, the rainbow was a magical river. It was hidden inside the green woods of Mbadede. Because it had healing powers, it was guarded. 

If you were sick, you drank the water. The rainbow was always happy to share. But it didn't like badly behaved people."

"Because of the river's magic, there was ice cream along the banks! Everyone who came to drink the water also enjoyed the ice cream, especially children. 

The ice cream from the river was red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple and indigo."

"One day, a naughty old woman called Mbom came from the land beyond. On arrival, she met with a guard. He did not know her and he felt a strange feeling. But he did not listen to his feelings. 

He pointed the way into the woods and told her to respect the river. Mbom agreed and went to the water."

"She took a drink and was healed. Then she looked around to make sure she wasn't being watched. 

Mbom picked up a stone and threw it in. She watched as it rose, and spread into a ripple. Pleased, she picked up a stick. She threw it in. The same thing happened."

"Mbom jumped right into the water! She hoped to get everlasting life. As soon as she jumped, the river rose up.  It shot high into the sky, never to return to Mbadede. But sometimes the rainbow follows after the rain, to feel like a river again. 

And there my story ends," said mother.

"So my lovelies tell me, why do you love this story so much? asked mother. "You often ask me to tell it."

"I love it because it reminds me to pay attention to my feelings," Udoo smiled. "It helps me to remember the colours of the rainbow," added Erdoo.

Eryum tried to push his luck, "I love it because it reminds me of ice cream! Can I have some now, pleeeaaase?" 

"Mmmm. It's cold now, let's eat ice cream tomorrow. Shall we?" mother says. Then she adds, "Next time, I will tell the tale of the end of the rainbow."

------------------------------------------------------------



For the children in every country of Africa

My name is Duma and I am ten years old.

I live with my sister Zinhle who is thirteen years old.

We live with Mama, Baba, our little brother Wandile, and our dog Bhubesi.

Since this coronavirus came, our lives have changed. 

It is such a small virus but it can make us very sick. Any person can get very sick from this coronavirus.

I am sad because I cannot play with my friends. 

Wandile is sad that he cannot hug his friends. 

Zinhle is also sad that she can't share her lip gloss with her friends.

Mama is a cleaner at the hospital in town. Baba sells fruits and vegetables in town.

Every morning they leave for work and Zinhle looks after us.

Our neighbour, Gogo, is very old and has a heart problem. 

No one is allowed near her these days. The coronavirus is very dangerous for older people.

We don't want to make her sick.

After work, Mama goes to check on Gogo and brings her fresh fruits. 

Mama leaves the fruits at the door because she can't go into the house.

Every morning, Zinhle goes to collect water from the nearby taps. 

Some people are wearing masks, some are not. Zinhle made a mask using her doek. 

She washes her hands at home. Mama puts hand sanitizer on our hands.

Every night, Mama reminds us: 

"Wear a fresh mask every day. Wash your hands with soap for 20 seconds when you arrive anywhere. Cover your mouth and nose if you cough or sneeze."

"Yes, Mama!" we say.

1. Wash your hands with water.
2. Use soap to wash your hands.
3. Wash for 20 seconds or slowly count from 1 to 20.
4. Rinse your hands with water.
5. Dry your hands with clean towel or tissue.
6. Now your hands are clean!



------------------------------------------------------------



We love sports. We make friends along the way.

Champions know that winning and losing are part of the game. Fair play and respect are the order of the day!

Our golden ball helps to grow our physical and motor skills. We become healthy as we play.

We grow our energy and performance as we play. It gives us good energy levels and performance in life.

On a bright sunny day, we play together. We are all champions of tomorrow with a bright future. 

We are safe while we play. Fun! Fun! Our golden ball brings joy!

With our golden ball, we easily win championships. Strong players create good teams! 

We win and lose together as a team. We don't blame anyone in any situation.

Our coach says, "The person who claims winning is not everything, never won anything." 

It is the best feeling!

Pele is our best teammate. Together, we are celebrated superstars. No game is played without us!

Along with our teammates, we make the world go round.

As friends, we play sports all day long!

Join us!

Do you have a golden ball?

Our coach says, "Children can experience magic in sports. Come play with us."

------------------------------------------------------------



Francesca is a curious and clever little girl.

She loves playing with her toys.

She lives in a cozy house with her mama, dada and brother, Raffy.

There are also two dogs, Bony and Blue.

Francesca's favorite toys are the nosy red bus and bed bat.

But she also enjoys looking at pictures in books.

One sunny morning, Francesca saw something exciting. Her dog, Bonny was walking on four legs just like her!

But everyone else was walking on two legs. She clapped her hands and giggled and shared her snack with Bonny.

Francesca wanted to walk too, just like Raffy. She pulled herself up using the edge of the couch. She took a wobbly step. 

But oh no! She fell down with a soft plop.

Francesca was a little scared but she did not give up. With her brother Raffy as her helper, she tried again. 

Step by step, she took tiny strides, holding onto her brother for balance.

Francesca practiced walking everyday. 

Sometimes she stumbled and sometimes she laughed, but she never stopped trying.

Francesca's big brother, Raffy, was very helpful. 

He held out his hands and encouraged, "Come on, Francesca! You can do it!"

With Raffy's help, Francesca took her first few confident steps. 

She felt so proud and happy that she clapped her hands and laughed out loud.

From that day on, Francesca's steps grew steadier and stronger.

She walked around the house, exploring every corner with her newfound skill.

And so, the little girl who once crawled on all fours had learned to walk on two legs!

Even when she was seated, she knew that she could stand up and walk!

------------------------------------------------------------



There was once a girl called Mulongo. She lived with her parents near the village of Budongo. 

One day, Mulongo's mother sent her to fetch water at the well.

On the way, Mulongo met her friends going to the forest to get firewood. She wanted to go with them. 

"Please wait for me under this muvule tree!" she said, "I have to fetch water for my mother." 

But her friends didn't want to wait.

"All right, I'll catch up with you in the forest!" said Mulongo. 

She ran off to fetch water and take it to her mother. Then she went to the forest to look for her friends.

She followed a path that led to a stream. On the other side of the stream were many tiny paths, each one, leading in a different direction. 

"Which path had her friends taken?" she wondered.

She chose the biggest path, and walked and walked,  but she could not find her friends. 

She was so tired that when she sat under a tree to rest, she fell fast asleep.

When Mulongo woke up, it was dark. In the darkness, yellow eyes were gleaming. She was surrounded by hyenas! 

Mulongo was too terrified even to cry out. She tried running, but the hyenas circled her hungrily.

"Don't move," said the gruff voice of the biggest hyena. "If you run, we'll eat you!" 

"Please let me go home!" Mulongo pleaded.

But instead the hyenas took Mulongo to their house in the forest. It was a dirty hut full of bones and buzzing flies. 

Mulongo lay down and pretended to go to sleep. In the darkness, she heard the hyenas talking to each other.

One hyena asked, "How is the fire doing? Is the water boiling?"

"Everything is ready," was the reply. "Should I bring her?" "Yes, yes!" growled the other hyenas. "We're hungry!" 

They were ready to drag Mulongo out of the hut.

The big hyena spoke, "Wait, remember the rule of the village. No hyena may eat alone. The whole family must share the meal." 

"I'll go and call the in-laws," said his wife. "I'll go and fetch my cousins," said the small hyena. "I'll fetch our brothers and sisters," said another. "And I will remain here with our food," said the big hyena.

The big hyena sat in the doorway of the hut and the others went off in different directions. They took a long time, and the big hyena began to doze in front of the warm fire. Soon he was snoring. 

This was Mulongo's chance! But how was she going to get past the hyena? He was so big he filled the whole doorway.

There was only one way. 

She took a flying leap right over the hyena's back, and ran as fast as her legs could carry her.

Just then the other hyenas returned, and saw what had happened. 

They ran after her, howling with anger and disappointment. But it was too late.

As she came to her village, one of the villagers recognised her and shouted, "Mulongo, Mulongo is coming, Mulongo is coming." 

Her father and mother ran out to meet her. They hugged her, while thanking God for saving their child, "Mulongo, Mulongo, we thought you had died!"

From that day, Mulongo and the other children never again went back to the forest alone.

------------------------------------------------------------



This is Jaaka the fisherman from Naminya.

He fishes on the river Nile.

He has a boat, fishing net and a hook.

He always wakes up very early in the morning to catch the Nile perch.

At around 10am, he's selling his catch in Jinja central market.

Jaaka what happened? Was it a loss? 

He's so sad.

"Today the situation is bad. The Nile breeze did not permit me to fish. And one perch swam away with my hook."

"But I have hope that tomorrow will be good, because I've bought a new hook."

------------------------------------------------------------



Man

Woman

Slow

Fast

Tall

Short

Thin

Fat

Young

Old



------------------------------------------------------------



Two kids wash hands.

Two friends are social distancing.

A little girl sneezes into her elbow.

Two boys greet with elbow bumps.

A boy and a girl wear masks and tap feet.

A sick girl stays at home.



------------------------------------------------------------



One day, my mother took me to a toy shop.

I got to the toy section of the shop.

I showed my mother the toy I liked most.

My mother bought the toy for me and I was very happy.

It was the best toy I had ever seen or owned. 

I loved it.

One day, after playing with my toy, I forgot where I had left it. 

When I came back, I couldn't find it.

I was unhappy.

So my mother took me back to the same toy shop.

I searched but I could not find any toy like the one I had.

I was very sad.

When we returned home, I found my toy outside our house.

I was happy again.

------------------------------------------------------------



I like playing with my friend Chuma.

We are good friends. 

When either one of us is sent somewhere, we go together.

One day, my grandmother sent me to the shop to buy salt and cooking oil. 

I went with Chuma.

On the way, we saw our friends playing football.

"Ah! Football!" I said. 

I wanted to play too.

I said to Chuma, "Let's ask if we can play with them. I like playing football very much."

Chuma replied, "Let us go to the shop first, then we can come to play."

But I replied, "Let us play first! Grandmother will not allow us to return."

We joined our friends to play. I was the goal keeper. 

The goal posts were made of two big stones.

I worked hard to catch the ball. 

My friends were not able to score any goals.

We played until the field was full of sand.

Then we went to the shop. Grandmother's money was gone! I started to cry. 

Chuma shouted, "Stop crying. You wanted to play first."

We returned home without salt or cooking oil. 

We were very dirty and worried.

Grandmother was annoyed when we got home. 

The first question she asked us was, "Where were you all this time?"

We had to tell her the truth. 

She warned, "You should never go to play without permission."

We went to feed the ducks.  

Later on, we cleaned ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Crocodile was sitting near a big lake basking in the sun. 

Ape arrived at the water and they greeted each other.

Ape asked where Crocodile lived. Crocodile answered, "I live in the lake." 

Ape was amazed. She asked Crocodile, "How is life in the water? Is it good?"

Crocodile answered, "Life in the water is good. Where do you live?" 

Ape answered, "I live in the trees. I eat fruits and leaves. What do you eat?"

Crocodile answered, "I eat meat." 

She was already thinking of how to catch Ape and eat her. 

She asked Ape, "Can you swim?"

Ape answered, "No, No! I cannot swim." 

Crocodile said, "Let me teach you how to swim." 

Ape answered, "No, I am not interested."

Crocodile lied to Ape saying, "We have become friends. Do not be afraid of me. Come, sit on my back." 

So Ape sat on Crocodile's back and Crocodile started swimming.

When they reached in the middle of the lake, Crocodile asked Ape, "How do you feel being in the lake? Are you comfortable?"

Ape answered, "It is interesting and I am happy."

Crocodile sighed and said to Ape, "My uncle is very sick. We haven't found the medicine to treat him."

Ape was so afraid that she was trembling. 

She wondered how she would escape from Crocodile.

Then Ape had an idea. She said to Crocodile, "Do not worry. I will give my heart for your uncle. Ape meat will cure him."

Crocodile was impressed. She said, "Really! Would you be willing to give your heart for my uncle?" 

Ape answered, "Yes of course. We are friends!"

A short while later, Ape said, "Oh! I'm really sorry my friend. I forgot my heart in a tree. Let's go back so I can fetch it."

Crocodile hesitated and then asked, "Are you sure? Will you bring your heart from the tree?" 

Ape answered, "Yes, I will bring it. I will even go with you to visit your uncle."

Crocodile agreed and swam back to the shore of the lake. 

As soon as they reached land, Ape jumped from Crocodile's back.

From the safety of a tree branch, Ape called, "Good bye my friend, Crocodile. Thank you for the lake tour."

Crocodile was angry. She hissed, "So, did you lie to me? Are you coming back with your heart?"

Ape responded, "I was able to sit on your back only because my heart was with me!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Grasshopper and Spider are friends.

Spider makes his web all day. 

He advises his friend Grasshopper to do the same.

Grasshopper hops and plays all day. 

He is too lazy to work.

One day, the two friends were in the field.

A big storm started.

Spider ran to his web for shelter. 

He was protected from the storm.

Grasshopper had no where to go. 

He had spent all his time hopping and playing.

Spider called out to his friend, Grasshopper to take shelter in his web.

Spider and Grasshopper were protected from the storm. 

Grasshopper learnt a very important lesson.

------------------------------------------------------------



God wanted someone to take care of the world.

Lion volunteered, "I am the king, I can do that."

Elephant shouted, "I am big. I am right for the job."

Shark thought his sharp teeth made him the right one.

Eagle laughed, "I fly and see everything. I am fit."

God said, "I will create humans for this job."

God created men and women with black skin.

Others had brown skin.

Others had yellow skin.

Others had pink skin.

Shark laughed at the humans, "How will they swim?"

God smiled, "They will learn."

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time in Ghana, there lived a cat and a mouse in an area called Siane Solo. 

"Siane Solo" means the northern part of River Ankobra.

Although they were in different villages, the mouse and cat lived close to one another. 

They did not know each other. Both of them lived with their children.

Every morning, the parents left their children in the house while they went to look for food. 

One day, when the parents went to the forest, their children decided to go out and play.

The kittens and young mice heard each other playing. 

When they met, they happily introduced themselves. They became friends.

Later, the kittens invited the mice to their house to eat together. 

After that, the mice returned home with joy.

Soon after the mice left, the mother cat returned. She noticed that her kittens were unusually happy. 

She asked, "My children, why are you so very happy today?"

They told their mother everything that happened between them and the mice while she was away.

The mother cat was disappointed and angry when she heard their news. 

She explained, "I went to the forest to hunt mice so that we can eat, but I could not find any. Meanwhile they were here in my house!"

The kittens were worried. 

They assured their mother that the mice would come back the next day because they were their friends.

The next day, the kittens waited and waited. The mice did not arrive. Mother cat asked her kittens to go and call them.

Meanwhile, mother mouse had also returned home and heard what had happened while she was away.

Mother mouse warned her children never to step foot in the cat's village again! She told them that cats and mice can never be friends.

Meanwhile, the kittens went to their meeting place and called, "Our dear friends, come and play."

"Our mother has prepared a delicious meal for us, come friends," called the kittens. 

The mice responded, "We are no longer your friends! We have also been obedient to our parents. So go, go, go and go!"

------------------------------------------------------------



Far, far away in the north of the country, there lived a community in a small village called Gikandi. 

Gikandi was headed by chief Kimamo.

The chief had a very beautiful daughter named Nyatiko. 

Nyatiko was the only child and her parents adored her.

Any time chief Kimamo held a village meeting, his daughter stood by his side. 

He wanted her to be prepared to take over the chiefdom after his departure.

Nyatiko grew more beautiful by the day. When she became of age, suitors flocked to her home to ask for her hand in marriage.

Every time she declined. She was very proud of her beauty.

Years passed by and the parents became very concerned. Their daughter was growing old and yet she hadn't accepted any man to marry her.

They desired to see their grandchildren.

After many young men had failed to convince Nyatiko to marry them, they gave up. 

One day, a very handsome man visited Nyatiko's home.

On seeing him, Nyatiko got very excited. She had not seen such a good looking man before.

She gazed at him and at once she knew that he was the one she had been waiting for.

She agreed to marry him and they had a very colourful wedding.

One night, the new husband turned into an ogre. He wanted to eat her up. 

Nyatiko became so terrified and screamed at the top of her voice for help. She ran out of the house as fast as she could.

The ogre ran after her. She went and hid behind a bush.

When he couldn't find her, he went back to the house, but Nyatiko slept in the bush.

In the morning, she hurried home. Though scared and disappointed, the parents were happy to have her back home safe and alive.

Nyatiko lived a lonely and miserable life.

------------------------------------------------------------



They closed the schools, and sent us home.

We cannot play with other children.

I miss being with my friends.

I miss going to school.

Mother is worried about Uncle.

He is sick in hospital.

Our parents are worried about everything.

Everyone is worried about getting sick from this virus.

All we hear about is the coronavirus!

I wish it would go away!

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there was a father who had two sons.

One day, he called his sons.

He said, "I am old and will die soon. But before I die, I want to see you in your own homes. You have one month to each make your own home. I want to see you back here after the month."

The two sons rushed out. The first one went to the roadside.

He cut down trees and began to build a big compound for himself.

The second one, however, went out and started forming special relationships with other families.

He went to different people, and he became like their foster child.

After a month, the two brothers came back to their father.

The father said, "Well, have you built your homes?" And both of the brothers said, "Yes."

The father went with his eldest son. He saw that the son had built many huts.

As he walked by each hut, he asked, "Is there anybody in this hut?"

Each time, the son replied, "No."

The father would ask, "Is there anybody in this hut?"

And the son would reply, "No."

The father became hungry, but there was no one to serve food to him.

He said, "Let's go home." So they went home.

The second brother took them to the first family he had adopted. He introduced them, "Here is my father and my brother."

The family welcomed the men. They slaughtered a sheep and gave them a big feast.

They went to the second family the younger son had adopted.

He introduced his father and brother and they were given another feast.

Father and brother were welcomed in all the places where the younger son was adopted.

They ate and were satisfied. Then they left for home.

The father said, "This is what I meant when I said you should make yourself a home. A home is more than many huts or a big expensive house. It is love, warmth and friendship with other people."

------------------------------------------------------------



There is a small shop near my house.



The shop owner is a thin man with a little voice.



It is hot outside.

I go to the fridge.

I get a strawberry Kingsley.



I give the thin man my money.



Then, I open my strawberry Kingsley and drink.



That cold Kingsley tastes so sweet!

------------------------------------------------------------



There was a man called Lodipo. 

He lived with his two wives, Akai and Akitela.

Lodipo's first wife, Akai, was the only one who helped his blind mother.

One day, Lodipo's younger wife, Akitela, said, "Let us move away to a safer place." 

The place where they lived was constantly attacked by cattle raiders. Akitela felt unsafe.

Lodipo told Akitela that his blind mother did not want to move. Akitela suggested that they should leave her behind. 

"If we don't go away, I will return to my parents," Akitela cried to Lodipo.

Lodipo loved Akitela very much so he agreed with her. They prepared to leave. 

The first wife, Akai, watched all this happening with confusion.

Lodipo's blind mother sat under a tree. She was unaware of what was going on. 

"How can we leave her on her own?" Akai wondered to herself.

Lodipo and his wives loaded all their belongings on their two camels. They left quietly without even saying goodbye to the old woman. 

Akai was crying because she was sad to leave her mother-in-law all alone.

The old woman cried and sang a sad song calling on her son. 

She wondered who would take care of her. She wondered who would take her out of the hot sun.

Immediately after Lodipo and his wives had left,  raiders attacked the place.

The raiders asked the old woman to tell them where her son went. "We are going after him to kill him," they told her. 

She pleaded, "Don't kill the first wife and her children." She also asked them to get back her ram.

The warriors followed Lodipo. Just as he was settling down in the new place, they caught up with him. 

They captured him and his young wife.

The first wife, Akai, went back to her mother-in-law with the ram. 

The two lived together happily.

------------------------------------------------------------



Andzani can see the constellations at night time. 

A constellation is a group of stars that forms a picture or pattern in the sky. These stars are very far away from earth.

Andzani wants to be an astronaut when he grows up. Astronauts travel to space.

There is no air or water in space. Astronauts must wear special suits to survive.

The suits have oxygen to breathe, and water to drink.

The suits also protect the astronauts from the cold, heat and space dust.

Astronauts travel on in spacecrafts, which are vehicles made to fly in outer space. 

Spacecrafts have very powerful rocket engines.

The engines must power a spacecraft away from the earth before it can reach space.

Rocket engines burn a lot of fuel to launch a spacecraft. 

When the fuel burns, it creates fire at the back of the rocket. 

The force of the fuel burning propels the rocket upwards. We also use rockets to launch satellites into space.

Many satellites travel around the earth. The moon is a natural satellite.

Satellites made by humans help us with activities such as weather forecasts and making maps.

Satellites always move in a circle around a bigger object in space. This movement is called an orbit.

Andzani knows a lot about the stars and planets in our solar system. 

He knows the names of the eight planets that orbit the sun.

He knows there is only one star in our solar system. That is the sun.

Meteors also orbit the sun. A meteor is a space rock. Most meteors are tiny dust, but some are large.

After they enter the atmosphere around earth, meteors fall fast and burn. They look like fire balls or 'shooting stars'.

Occasionally, a meteor hits the ground!

It is an extremely long distance from the ground to space.

A telescope is a tool which helps us to see things much further away than our natural eyes can see.

Andzani studies the sky with a telescope until he can travel to space.

------------------------------------------------------------



My friend Kiki and I love to go exploring. We know our neighbourhood well. 

Every day after school we try to think of a new place to explore.

When walking home we often cut across the big field near the old railway. Although Kiki's father has warned us not to go there. 

On that day, we noticed a tall man in a black coat walking behind us. But at first we didn't worry.

We slowed down to look at the man. His skin was full of pimples. He had dark brown teeth. 

He had a deep scar across half his face. This man was following us!

We decided to stop and face the stranger. My heart beat so loudly that I thought he could hear it. 

I stared at him, paying attention to his features and clothes. He did not like the fact that I was looking at him so keenly. He shouted, "What are you looking at, boy?"

At that point, we turned and ran! My friend Kiki escaped but I was not fast enough. 

He caught me by my shirt and pulled me back roughly. The man held me so tight that I thought my ribs would crack.

The tall man picked me up like a piece of paper and threw me into a van parked nearby. Then he got in the front of the van. 

Another man blindfolded me and tied my hands behind my back. Then the driver drove away at the speed of an ambulance.

In the back of the van, the man next to me held a wet rag over my face. The rag smelled sweet, and made me feel very sleepy. 

When I woke up I found myself sitting on the floor in a dark room with cobwebs and mice. At least I was no longer blindfolded.

The door of the dark room opened noisily, and a man entered carrying a plate. He was the man who tied me up and put me to sleep. 

"Here is food for you. You better eat because you are going on a long journey," the man mumbled. He untied my hands.

When I heard the word 'journey' I decided to eat. I would need to get the strength to rescue myself. 

As I ate, the man sat down and smoked a cigarette. The smoke filled the entire room.

Suddenly, the other two men came in dragging a boy. It was Kiki! 

They had caught him as well. Now we were both trapped in the dark room.

I understood that the tall man was the leader of the group. He gave orders to the other two. But the man who brought me the food did not seem to like what they were doing. 

We heard them arguing outside the room. The leader shouted, "I don't care if you know his family. You can't change your mind now."

This argument made us realise that one of them knew us. I wondered who it was. Kiki said, "We must escape. Our parents don't have the ransom money." 

Luckily, the men started fighting. I untied my friend. We quietly bolted the door inside the room and looked for a way to escape.

We saw some thin cracks of light between old timber nailed across one wall. We pulled at the wood until the nails came out of the wall. 

We pulled at another, and another, until the thin dim light became brighter. There was a small window under the wooden planks!

Quickly we made a decision. Kiki was faster and smaller than me, so he would run to get help. I helped him up. Kiki wriggled out of the window. 

It was not far to the ground outside, and I heard him land on his feet. He took a deep breath, then he was gone.

By this time the men were kicking the door against the bolt. They burst into the room and stood for a minute looking at the window. Then they rushed outside, pushing each other, not sure which direction to go. 

They were furious, especially the leader. He hit me, shouting, "Your parents will pay for this!"

The men nailed back the planks of wood over the window and locked me in the room. They continued arguing. 

The man who smoked a lot wanted to let me go. The driver was worried that my friend would come back with the police. And the leader, well, he wanted the ransom money.

It seemed like forever before I heard a soft tap from outside, on the broken window. 

A grown up voice said, "Don't be scared. Police are here. Lie on the floor, cover your head. Don't move."

I'm not sure what happened next. Everything happened! 

The men were taken by surprise as police stormed the room they were in. There was lots of shouting and noise, and some gunshots.

A policewoman opened the door to the room. She picked me up off the floor, and wrapped a blanket around me. 

She said, "Your friend was lucky. He found us on patrol when he ran into the road. After we heard his story, we called for backup and came to teach these criminals a lesson!"

The three men were arrested, handcuffed, and bundled into a police van. I got into a car with the policewoman. She took me home to my worried parents. 

After that day, Kiki and I were more careful when we went exploring.

------------------------------------------------------------



I enjoy skipping with my friend.

I enjoy writing letters on the board.

I enjoy reading picture books.

I enjoy eating fruit.

I enjoy helping at home.

I enjoy listening to my mother's stories.

I enjoy sleeping on a big bed.

I enjoy doing these things. 

What do you enjoy doing?

------------------------------------------------------------



There once lived a father, mother and five children. The first born was a boy, then two older daughters and two younger daughters.

They all lived together in their big house in Stone village.

The two older girls were almost the same age. They always competed with each other and argued about who would cook or wash utensils.

They wondered why they had to wear similar clothes or go to the same school. 

Their fights seemed never to end.

The two younger girls were five years younger than their older ones. From the time they were small, they formed a strong bond of friendship. 

They did their tasks together and played with their friends together.

Father and Mother watched how the older girls behaved and they were concerned. They decided to call a family meeting to help their children to learn to live together in unity. 

Father talked about the importance of respecting one another's views.

He went on to say, "Always ask for permission if you need to use someone else clothes or shoes. This will help to reduce the cases that I have to deal with in the evenings."

Mother added, "I have created a duty roster for each of you to follow."

The duty roster listed all the tasks each child was supposed to do every day. The tasks included cooking, washing clothes, cleaning the house and fetching water. 

If anyone needed help, they were to ask the others politely.

Each child was asked if they were happy with their duty. They were also asked if they wanted anything else to be added on the duty roster.

Father and Mother also came up with family rules. All the children were happy with the new arrangements.

Father finished the meeting by saying, "We should always help one another. Let's try to understand one another so we can be a happy united family."

Questions

1. How many are you in your family?

2. What can you learn from this family?

3. How do you solve challenges in your family?

------------------------------------------------------------



Let me tell you my story. 

I start as a small spark.

I spread when the wind carries me.

We are good friends,  you and I.

I cook your food.

I light your night.

I have many tricks.

I am part of your family.

But be careful when you invite me to your home. 

I don't like to be left alone.

------------------------------------------------------------



I'm Maria.

This is my mother.

This is the baby.

This is my father.

This is my brother.

This is my sister.

This is my grandmother.

This is my grandfather.

This is my uncle.

This is my aunt.

This is my family.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, there lived a family in a village far from the city. The village was surrounded by a forest with many animals.
 
A boy called Deng and his sister Nyekuiy lived in the village with their mother. 

They were taught how to be good children, and how to live happily.

Deng played near their cow yards and learned to milk goats.

He learned to hunt animals, and to fish in the river to catch turtles.

One day, Deng's mother could not find him anywhere. She was worried. The family looked for him everywhere but did not find him.

Deng finally came home that night. He was carrying an antelope's head. His mother asked him, "Where have you been? What are you carrying?" 

"I went hunting wild animals with the village boys," replied Deng. His mother was concerned because hunting wild animals can be dangerous. "Don't hunt in the forest again," she told Deng.

His mother took a stick to beat him for not listening to her. Deng saw the stick and ran. He hid up a tree and his mother could not find him.

Nyekuiy called to her brother, "Deng, Mama isn't around, come home and eat with me!" The boy came down to eat.

"Deng, I want to talk to you after your meal," said his mother.

But after eating, Deng ran out to play and then went hunting again.

His mother was concerned about his behaviour. "He should go to school in the city. How can I explain this to Deng so that he accepts the idea?" she wondered.

Mother wrote a letter to her brother, Bidiit, in the city. After some time, she received a letter in return from Bidiit. He told her that he was coming to visit them in the village.

The children were excited to meet their uncle from the city.

Bidiit arrived one month later.

"My children, your uncle has arrived," said mother. 

"Let's meet our uncle," Nyekuiy told Deng. They both laughed as they ran towards Bidiit.
 
"You are beautiful children," said Uncle Bidiit. "I think that you will be happy living in the city with your uncle!" said mother to her children.

"I will take you to the city and you can go to school," said Uncle Bidiit. 

He continued, "In a few months' time, there is a ship coming up the river past the village. I will buy tickets for you."

He added, "When you come to the city, I will buy bicycles for you!"

The children were so happy that they couldn't eat that day.

Two weeks later, Uncle Bidiit's holiday was over, and he returned to the city. 

After four months, the ship finally arrived to take Nyekuiy and Deng to the city. Their mother put them on the ship and waved goodbye.

The ship carried the children on a seven-day journey along the river.

Deng and Nyekuiy watched the wind in the grass as the ship moved through the water.

They were joyful that they were going to school. They dreamed of one day studying law or medical science.

When the ship arrived in the city, Uncle Bidiit was at the dock waiting for the children. 

Deng took out some fruits and gave them to his uncle's children as they met. They asked with smiles, "What is this fruit?" 

Deng replied, "They are village fruits, very sweet!"

Nyekuiy and Deng lived in the city with their Uncle Bidiit for many years.

They worked hard at school and went to study at university. 

When they got jobs, they supported their mother.

------------------------------------------------------------



Once upon a time, Leopard and Squirrel were friends. 

They shared a herd of goats. They took turns to take the goats out for grazing.

Leopard was not good at goat herding.

When he took the goats out, they always came back hungry.

Squirrel always went out with her mother. Squirrel's mother climbed into the trees and pulled off the leaves.

She threw the leaves down to the goats and they ate happily.

One day, Leopard said to Squirrel, "When you take the goats out, they come home happy. But when I take them out, they come home hungry. Why is that?" 

Squirrel pointed at the branding iron next to the fire.

She said, "I tie the branding iron to the goats' tails. They get frightened, so they run around and find food. But when you take them, they are lazy and stand in one place. That's why they don't find any food."

Leopard was angry. "This stupid Squirrel is not telling me the truth," he thought. "She's laughing at me. I'll follow her tomorrow and watch."

So, the next day, Leopard followed Squirrel. He was careful to make sure that she didn't see him.

He watched her from far away.

Squirrel stopped under a tree and called, "Mother! Come and help me! I have to find food for the goats!" 

At once, Squirrel's mother began to help her daughter. She pulled leaves off the branches.

"Look at that!" thought Leopard. "Squirrel's mother helps her. They don't use any branding irons at all."  

He felt angry. "Squirrel thinks I'm stupid," he thought. "She was trying to trick me. But I'll show her!"

The next day, it was Leopard's turn to take out the goats. He took them past the tree and called, "Mother! Come and help me! I have to find food for the goats." 

Squirrel's mother ran down from the tree. Leopard jumped on her and killed her.

The next day, it was Squirrel's turn again.

She drove the goats past the tree and called, "Mother! Come and help me! I have to find food for the goats." But no one answered. No one came. "Mother!" Squirrel called again. "Where are you?"

Squirrel suspected the truth and began to cry. "Oh, Mother," she cried. "You're dead. Was it Leopard who killed you?"

Squirrel wept all day and her eyes became red.

In the evening, Squirrel drove the goats home again. "What's the matter, Squirrel?" asked Leopard. "Why are your eyes red?"

"I met the healer today," answered Squirrel. "He gave me some medicine to put in my eyes. With this medicine I will become big and strong."

Leopard said, "I would like some of that medicine. Can you give me some?"

Yes," replied Squirrel. "But you won't like it because it will hurt your eyes," said Squirrel.

"Give me the medicine now," said Leopard. He lay down and opened his eyes.

Squirrel took some stones and put them on the fire. They became red hot.

She put them on Leopard's eyes. "Take the stones away!" screamed Leopard. "Give me back my eyes!" Leopard was blinded by the stones.

"I'll give you back your eyes when you bring back my mother," hissed Squirrel.

------------------------------------------------------------

